THE *UBRARY 

OF 
THE UNIVERSITY 
OF TEXAS 

PRESENTED  BY 

THE AUTHOR 
Tl9G5 
W388 
cop.2 

., 

Tl968 
W388 
COP. 

2 

' '  

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  TEXAS  AT  AUSTIN 
THE  GENERAL  LIBRARI•ES 

This  Item  is  Due  on the Latest·Date Stamped 

DUE 

RETURNED

OUT  TO  1LS 
~~3iOil 
MAY  1 0 1996 
1r~y, w. 

l~U  G2Z007 

OUT  TO  'LS 
M.AR  0 3 2009 

()(  I  1 ? ZOO 

GEOLOGY OF THE  FLUVIAL  DEPOSITS  OF  THE 

COLORADO  RIVER  VALLEY,  CENTRAL  TEXAS 

APJ;'ROVED: 

GEOLOGY OF  THE  FLUVIAL  DEPOSITS  OF  THE 

COLORADO  RIVER  VALLEY,  CENTRAL  TEXAS 

by 

GERALD  ERIC  WEBER,  B.A. 

THESIS 

Presented to the  Faculty of the  Graduate  School of 

The  University of Texas  at Austin 

in Partial Fulfillment 

of the  Requirements 

for the  Degree  of 

MASTER  OF ARTS 

THE  UNIVERSITY OF  TEXAS  AT  AUSTIN 

August  1968 

The  Library 
The  University 
of  Texas 

ABSTRACT 

Terrace  deposits  along a  4 0  mile  segment of the  Colorado River between 

Austin and Bastrop,  Tex~s, are  mapped  in detail.  The  following.deposits have 

been delineated  (lowest to  highest):  Floodplain,  Sixth Street Terrace 1  Montop­

olis Terrace,  Capitol Terrace I  Hornsby  Terrace,  Asylum  Terrace,  and  Delaney 

Terrace.  The  Hornsby Terrace  deposits _and  the  Montopolis  Terrace  deposits 

were .previously  unrecognized.  A program  of mechanical analysis was  conducted 

on samples taken from  the  terrace  deposits  and the  floodplain.  Cumulative  fre­

quency curves of grain size  from  five  samples  collected up  to  15  miles  apart 

from  the Asylum  Terrace  gravel,  are  distinctively grouped-different from  all · 

other samples.  Cumulative  frequency  curves from  five  samples from  the 

Hornsby Terrace  gravel also  plot in a  close  grouping distinct from  other samples. 

Over short distances where  abrasion is not a  dominant factor  it seems  that 

grain size  distribution may be  useful as a  means  of  correlation of terrace 

remnants. 

Analysis  of the .lithologies  of these  samples  indicate that the Hornsby, 

Asylum  and  Delaney Terrace  gravels  are  practically without limestone  clasts, 

in a  drainage  basin that is 1  presently 1  composed  domine.ntly  of limestone. 

This  suggests  that the  Commanche  Series in the  Edwards  Plateau region was 

not extensively exposed but was  covered by the  Gulf Series  at the  time  of the 

formation  of these  terraces. 

The  Manor lag  gravel,  an upland  gravel  in the thesis area,  is thought 

. to be  the remnant of a  high terrace .deposit of the  Colorado  River. 

3 

4 

All .terraoe .gravels  except the  Capitol and  Montopolis Terrace  gravels 

are .thought to be the.result ?f  lateral  planation by a  stree.m  at or near grade. 

The  Montopolis .and Capitol Terrace  gravels are .thought to be .the. result of a 

lengthy episode  of lateral planation by the  Colorado River accompanied by slow 

degradation. 

CONTENTS 

Abstract 

Introduction 

Acknowledgements 
Location. and Accessibility 
Geography 
Vegetation 

I' Problem  of Surface  Mapping  on the  Coastal Plain 

Local  Problems  of Mapping  and Correlation 

·f. Previous. Studies  of the  Fluvial  Deposits  of the  Colorado River 

Formation of Floodplains  - Their Related  Deposits  and River Terraces 

Formation of Terraces 

Terminology and Terrace  Names 

Descriptive  Geology - Fluvial  Deposits  of  the  Colorado River 

Manor Lag  Gravel 
Delaney Terrace  Deposits 
Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 
Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 
Capitol  Terrace  Deposits 
Montopolis  Terrace  Deposits 
'~  Sixth. Street Terrace  Deposits 
..,;  Floodplain  Deposits 

Deposits  of Tributaries to the  Colorado  River 
Longitudinal Profile  of  the  Colorado  River and Its  Terraces 

Lithologic  and Mechanical Analysis  of Terrace  Gravels 

Sampling Procedure 
Mechanical.Analysis 
Lithologic Analysis 

Mechanical Analysis:  Interpretation of Results 

'>f  Valley Floor Samples 

Sixth Street I  Montopolis I  and  Capitol Terrace  Deposits 
Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 
Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 
Delaney Terrace  Deposits 
Deposits  of Tributaries  of the  Colorado  River 
Conclusions 

5 

3 

8 
8 
9 
9 
12 
13 
14 
15 

. 22 
24 

26 

27 
27 
30 
32 
34 
36 
38 
(3~ 
41 
43 
44 

46 
46 
47 
48 

49 
49 
50 
51 
51 
60 
60 
62 

Lithologic Analysis :and Weathering  Characteristics .:  Summary  of Results 

-AFloodplain Deposits  of the  Colorado  River 
. Sixth.Street,  Montopolis,  and  Capitol Terrace  Deposits 
Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 
Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 
Delaney Terrace  Deposits 
Manor Lag  Gravel 
Deposits  of Tributaries  . to  the  Colorado River 
Weathering of Alluvial  Deposits  - General  Statement 

Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 
Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 
Capitol,  Montopolis,  and. Sixth  Street Terrace  Deposits 
XFloodplain  Deposits 
Deposits  of Tributaries  to the  Colorado  River and  Manor Lag 

Gravel 

i-c  Conclusions 

Summation 

Appendix 

References  Cited 

6 

64 
64 
65 
65 
66 
6 6 
6 7 
70 
71 
72 
73 
.74 
75 

76 
7 7 

~  82 

85 

118 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Fig.  1 

Index Map 

Fig •. 2 

·Asylum  Terrace  Gravel  on Park  Springs· Bench 

Fig.  3  Capitol Terrace  Gravel 

Fig.  4  Capitol Terrace  Gravel at location· 79 

Fig.  5  Capitol Terrace Gravel at location· 79 

Fig.  6 

, Montopolis  Terrace  Gravel at location. 174 

Fig.  7  Deposits  of the  Colorado River  Floodplain 

Fig.  8 

· Conversion  .Tables 

Fig.  9  Cumulative  Frequency Curves  - Colorado River  Floodplain 

Fig.  10  Cumulative  Frequency Curves· - Colorado River Terraces 

Fig.  11  Cumulative  Frequency Curves  - Hornsby Terrace 

Fig.  12  Cumulative  Frequency Curves  - Asylum  Terrace 

. Fig.  13  Cumulative  Frequency Curves  - Tributaries 

Fig.  14  Cumulative  Frequency Curves  - Manor Lag  Gravel 

Fig.  15  ·Cumulative  Frequency Curves· - Genetic. Groupings 

Fig.  16  Lithology of Samples 

Fig.  17  Lithology of Terrace Gravels 

Plate I  Geologic Map 

Plate IT  Cross-sections 

7 

10 

33 

.35 

37 

37 

40 

40 

· 52 

53 

54 

· 55 

· 56 

· 57 

58 

59 

68 

69 

Inside  Back  Cover 

Inside Back  Cover 

Tbe  Library 
The  University 
of  Texas 

INTRODUCTION 

This. study was  initiated in the  spring  of  1963  with the  intent of dealing 

with .the  origin of the  nuvalde  Gravel".,  Plio-Pleistocene gravel deposits found 

on the  intarstream divides between the majdr river  systems  of the  Texas  Coastal 

Plain.  Shortly after beginning field studies  it became  evident that a  detailed 

Study ~of the  terraces of the  Colorado River would  be  a  prerequisite to under­

standing  the  significance  of the  11  Uvalde  Gravel 11  in the  Colorado drainage 

basin.  The  problem  was  therefore  expanded to include  an eval~t!on of  previous 

studies of the  surficial geology of the  area,  including a  remapping  of the  Co!­

orado  terraces.  Emphasis was  placed on a  study of the  lithology and the  mech­

anical analysis  of  samples  collected from  the  terrace  deposits  and  the flood­

plain.  Large  samples  were  collected from  the  coarsest conglomerate beds in 

the. deposits,  rather than small samples from  fine  grained  sand beds.  It was 

thought that this  sampling procedure and the  methods  of analysis might help 

produce  data  which would be more  characteristic of  the  stream deposits  than 

that resulting from  analys~s of fine  grained  sands  interbedded in the  gravels. 

Acknowledgements 

Dr ..  J. H.  Mackin 1  my  thesis adviser,  assisted in every phase  of the 

work,  especially in the  clarification of theories  and ideas.  Dr.  Mackin sug­

gested the method of  mechanical and  lithologic analysis  which turned  out to 

be .a quick,  accurate .method  of defining  the  lithologic  and  textural character­

ist!os  of the. different terrace. deposits.  The  writer would  also like  to. express 

his thanks  to  Drs ..  P.  Rhodda  and  D.  Barker"  the  other committee  members  who 

8 

9 

critically read the  thesis. 

The  writer is also  deeply indebted to  Mr.  Gedrge  Coates who  supplied 

$700  to help  defray field  expenses in the  summer of  1963. 

Finally,  a  great tiee.l  of credit should go  to  my  wife,  Pat,  without whose 

encouragement arid  helt>  the ,thesis  would  never have  been completed. 

Location and Accessibility 

The  area  studied  (Fig.  1)  extends  from  the  upper end at Lake Austin forty 

miles  down river to  the vicinity of Bastrop.  North of  the  Colorado River  the 

area extends  to  Brushy  Creek near Georgetown,  north of the  interstream divide 

between the drainage basins  of  the  Colorado and Brazos  Rivers. 

The  area  mapped  south of the  river is much  smaller and extends  only to 

the  vicinity of Onion Creek .. 

The  entire  area  is readily accessible by car on excellent roads.  Very 

little  difficulty is encountered  when on foot  except for  tangles  of  shrub  and 

undergrowth  along  streams. 

Geography 

Central Texas  is divided into  two  prominent  physiographic  provinces, 

the  high  standing Edwards  Plateau  (elevation 800  - 1, 000  feet  near Austin) 

and  the relative  lowlands  of  the  Gulf  Coastal Plain (elevation  500  - 650  feet 

near Austin).  The  Plateau and  the  Coastal Plain are  separated by the  Balcones 

Escarpment,  which is a  resequent fault  line  scarp in the  immediate  vicinity 

of Austin.  The  escarpment is associated with  the  Balcones  Fault Zone,  which 

extends  across  Texas  in a  broad arc from  Del Rio  on the  Rio  Grande  to  the 

vicinity of Fort  Worth. 

10 

TEXAS 

INDEX  MAP  OF 

REPORT  AREA 

Limit  of  detailed 
work  in  report  area 

field 

SCALE 

10  5  0 

10 

miles 

north 

11 

The -Colorado River has entrenched itself approximately 300 to 350 feet 

into the Plateau and numerous  tributaries  to  the main  stream have  cut head­

ward into.-the .horizontal limestones,  creating a  rugged dissected topography. 

The  re.latively level  surface  of the  plateau is the result of erosional  stripping 

of weak Upper Cretaceous Gulf Series from  the  resistant Lower Cretaceous lime­

stones. 

The  Texas  Coastal Plain is an area of low relief,  with  gently undulating 

hills .and  valleys,.. broken only occasionally by hills and cliffs of considerable 

height.  Just south of Onion Creek,  Pilot Knob~ an exhumed volcan!c .neck of 

Cretaceous, age~ fonns  a  topographic  high. 

A striking feature .of the  Coastal Plain is .the Black Prairie  {also called 

. Ta.ylor Prairie)  of Central Texas.  As  defined by Hill  (1901,  p.  67-68)  and by 

Duessen (1930,  p ..  12)  the  Black Prairie  (Taylor Prairie)  marks  the outcrop of the 

Taylor Marl a  characteristic feature  of which is a  stiff,  black,  waxay1  calcar­

eous, .. clay soil  (chernozem)  which .grades dowdward into -a ._ jointed and.  laminated 

.light blue marl.  The  Black Prairie -as defined in present. usage  includes .all of 

the  Upper  Cretaceous rocks  and  the Midway Formation of the  Teriary Period. 

This  prairie is extremely fertile  and fonns ,the  most valuable filnning land in 

the  state.  The  Taylor Marl  outcrop area in the vicinity of Austin is overlain 

by extensive deposits  of .lag gravel .. 

Other prominent features  of the  Coast.al Plain are  gravel covered .terraces 

and floodplains  of .the  major rivers  which cross the  Coastal Plain.  While  less 

fertile  than the Black Prairie  these .surfaces  are  also extensively cultivated .. 

Farming is fa.o.!lltated  by abundant  supplies  of  groundwater available from 

shallow ;vells in the river bottoms but groundwater in the  terraces is poor in 

-12' 

quality and low in .quant.;l.ty. 

Vegetation 

The  Edwards  Plateau and the  Coastal Plain show distinctive  floras  which 

are.characteristic. of the  soil types developed on the  underlying bedrock ..  As 

pointed out by Hill and Vaughn  (1896-97,  p.  210)  the flora  of the  Edwards 

Plateau shows  three  distinct phases.  The  valley floors  are favorable  to the 

growth  of  trees.  The  loose  soil and constant moisture  encourages the  growth 

of elm,  live  oak_,  pecan,  sycamore"  cypress  and other varieties.  Associated 

with the  trees are thick undergrowths  of ferns  and other plants requiring con­

stant moisture.  The  vall~y sides have.a very  poor,. dry,  rocky soil which 

supports  plants  with  large  strong roots  such as dwarf oak,  mountain  juniper, 

and yucca.  The  summit of the  Plateau is covered by  grass-and low shrubs  with 

occasional clumps  of  shin oak,  juniper,  scrub  oak and other tenacious  hardy 

plants.  In the Austin area where  the  Plateau is  strongly dissected,  there is 

very little  grass. 

The  White  Rock  Prairie  at the- inner margin of the  Coastal Plain is  under­

lain by the  Upper Cretaceous Austin Group 1  a  series of  poorly resistant chalky 

limestones.  Vegetation in this zone ranges  from  juniper where  the  soil is 

rocky and  thin,.  to live oak and  clumps of mesquite where  the  soil is thick 

and moisture is plentiful. 

East of the Austin Group  the outcrop  of the  Upper Cretaceous Navarro 

13 

Formation and Taylor Marl form  the Black Par!rie.  The  prairies are covered by 

heavy growths  of  grasses  with a  scattering of mesquite  thickets. 

Farther to the. east the  Upper Cretaceous  strata are .overlain by Tertiary 

.sandstones,. siltstones and claystones characterized by forests  of .blackjack 

and live oak with a  scattering of mesquite,  chaparral and. cactus.  Near 

Bastrop is an isolated forest of pines  associated with the  outcrop of the 

Carrizo Sand Formation •  . 

Problems  of Surface Mapping on the Coastal Plain 

The  Texas  Coastal Plain is a  broad,  flat region of extremely low topo­

graphic .and  structural relief.  The  Upper Cretaceous  and Tertiary sediments 

dip  gulfward at angles  of  1  - 4  degrees .and  physiographic features  are  low 

and subdued.  A dense vegetation present. in some  areas is a  hindrance to 

field  work,  acting as.an impenetrable barrier and obscuring outcrops.  In some 

areas  of the  Coastal Plain,. however 1  the vegetation is the key to geologic 

mapping with  certain floras  being restricted to  distinct lithologic  units. 

The. best outcrops  on the  Coastal Plain are  generally in man made  ex­

cavations  such as gravel pits,  road cuts,  and ditches.  Some  exposures are 

found  in stream beds, . in bluffs  along major river flood  plains and in areas 

of recent rapid  gullying. 

Deposition of wedges  of side-stream alluvial material at the rear edges 

of terraces  and rounding  of the frontal  scarps tend  to blur the  terraces as 

topographic features.  The higher the terrace  the more  extensive  is its mod­

ification .and the  poorer is :the  chance  of finding  an outcrop of the  terrace 

14 

deposit which !a "in place." 

Local Problems  of Mapping and Correlation 

The  Colorado River terraces are best developed north of the river at 

Austin,  which is the area  studied by Hill and Vaughn  (1896-9 7),  Dueasen (193 0) 

and others.  At  present this area is completely urban~  As  a  consequence of 

construction,  excavation etc.,  the deposits of the Asylum,  Hornsby,  Capitol 

and Sixth Street Terraces have been either destroyed or covered and mapping 

and detailed sampling  of terrace deposits is no longer possible.  As a  result, 

terraces were mapped through downtown Austin as morphogenetic  units rather 

than deposits. 

The  terrace deposits are best exposed east of Austin where  striking 

color and lithologic contrasts between.the red Colorado River deposits and 

the  light grey limestones and marls of the Gulf Series greatly simplify the 

mapping  problem.  Color and lithologic .contrast is especially important be­
cause .there is usually not a well defined angular discordance between bedrock 

and terrace gravel. 

Farther to the  southeast,  near Bastrop,  the  sands and gravels of Tertiary 

age .are .s1mllar to the  terrace deposits in lithology and color.  .It is therefore 

difficult to map  the  base. of the .terrace .deposits even in areas of excellent 

exposure. 

Deposits of tributaries .. are  composed chiefly of  pebbles of the  underlying 

marly. bedrock.  Especially where  such deposits are deeply weathered or partly 

cemented by caliche they ·are indistinguishable,_except in areas of good ex­

15 

posure,  from  outcrops of weathered bedrock.  Consequently , .it.i• impoaai.ble 

to accurately map .remnants  of the higher terraces  of Wllbarger,. Walnut, 

Onion.and Barton Creeks.  Where  the  sidestream terrace deposits are of large 

areal extent they have been mapped  on the .basis of topography. 

Terraces  composed largely of limestone clasts are in general less well 

defined than Colorado River terraces of the  same  age.  The .terrace deposits 

of the  more.soluble limestone and .marl  particles are modified  greatly 1n the 

wet climate,  while'..the.chert and quartz  terrace deposits of the  Colorado River 

form  a  more  resistant unit. 

A problem area.exisbs  south of the Colorado River due :east of St•  Blmo 

Bench (see Plate I).  On a  large  low relief surface .are perched a  few residual 

knobs  of  stream gravel.  The .deposits of Onion Creek, . the  Colorado River and 

St.  Elmo Bench merge and the .relationship between them is obscure.  This ..area 

is presently occupied by Bergstrom Air Force Base and is off limits to u.nauthor­

ized personnel.  Contacts in the area are based on map  and air photo interpret&­

t!on.  Even if access to .the base was obtainable,  the construction of runways 1 

hangers and other base .facillt!es  has modified  the originaLfeatures beyond 

recognition. 

Previous Studies  of th~ Fluvial  Deposits 
of the  Colorado R1ver 

In the first  published  de~cription of the  fluvial deposits  of the  Colorado 

River Hill and Vaughn  (1896-97,  p.  248,  249)  recognized two  distinct groups 

of terraces: 

On the  north  side of the river these terracescanbe divided into 

16 

tWO 'Q&trltfOl'ieJJt  (l) A  series of higher levels above the  present stream 
valleys,..  the .integrity of which has been destroyed by erosion;  and  (2)
'th•••·iorarer the  present stream way 1  which maintain their origU.l 

integrity... 

l'he first class of terraces included the Asylum and Capitol terraces 

(Hill and Vaughn 1896-9 7 #  p.  249)  while  the .second class included all others. 

Rega.rding  the .second group of terraces,  they  stated that (p.  25tl): 

Some  40  to  60  feet above  the river at low water and above the 
present limits  of the highest water .int!mes of overflow is a  vast flat 
or .. second bottom"  often several roiles  in width.  The  bottom in places 
conaiata of five  or more  terraces form1ng  stepllke deacenu to the 
river••• the ..highest of the .second group  of terraces is that upon 
which the..ma.inbusiness  portion of the City of Austin is built. 

This terrace is equivalent to the  Sixth Stlreet Tem1ce  of later workers., 

specifically Weeks  (1945,  p.  1708). 

On the same  page .they describe .another four  terrace levels as being

.._.....":".­

present between the Sixth ·street Terrace .and the river at Austin.  Their litho­

logic -description of the .terrace .deposits is as follows: 

The  material of the  lower group of terraces is  usually fine  sandy 
loam  with occasional beds  of  gravel or clay.  At Austin excellent.:bricks 
are manufactured from the clay beds.  Duriil.g  :the .Ume. of .the .formation 
of these  terraces the headwater drainage  of the river had worked its 
way back ·.and down into the Red Beds country and was bringing d.own 
material sim1lar to th.at  which now gives that Colorado  water its 
charaoter!stic .color,  and from  which .the .river derives its name. 

Later workers  have  subdivided some  of the .terraces but the  newer class­

ifications have not differed greatly from that of Hill and Vaughn,  the differences 

being chiefly in the treatment of the lower terraces. 

Duessen (1930,  p~ -lll, 122)  recognized ·the  same terraces but did  not 

usa  the terminology of am::.'aR.d.  Vaughn.  lie numbered the terraces from  one .to 

17 

six;  one  the .lowest and youngest.  Six is equivalent to the Asylum Terrace,  and 

four is equivalent: to the Capitol Terrace  of Hill and Vaughn (1896-97,  p.  249). 

Duessen•s terrace number five,  not recognized by other workers,  is equivalent 

to the Hornsby Terrace.  Probably because of his  lack of good topographic -base 

maps,  which did not become available  until  1955,  Deussen did not recognize 

the .widespread .nature  of this  terrace. 

Deussen divided the .floodplain of the  Colorado River into two distinct 

terraces  which include what are  presently known as the  First Street and River­

view Terraces of Weeks  (1945  p.  1710). 

Weeks  (1945  Po  1693-1720) recognized the Asylum and Capitol Terraces 

(Hill and Vaughnl896-97)  but did  not recognize  the  presence of the Hornsby 

Terrace.  He  also designated the deposits of St.  Elmo Bench as part of the 

Uvalde  Formation.  He  divided the floodplain of the Colorado into three  terrace 

levels.  . The .higher part of the .floodplain was  named  the  First Street Terrace. 

The  Riverview and  Sandbeach Terraces are  below this;  the Sandbeach Terrace 

in Weeks•  conception .is  only  5-10 feet above  the  river at or near low water. 

These  lower three  terraces  in Weeks•  classification are  not features  resulting 

from  lateral planation separated by periods  of downcutting but represent only 

minor episodes of channeling of the floodplain by floodwaters. 

In  1942  Mathis completed a  heavy mineral  study of the  Colorado River 

terraces.  The  study included .the  major terraces  of the  Colorado from Austin to 

Columbus,  140 miles downriver.  No detailed mapping of the terraces  was done 

ln conjunction with the sampling and laboratory study.  There  is only a  gener­

18 

aUzed map of. the ~~tin area'and.  there  is no indication .of where ·the samples 

were. collected; hence it. is impossible to return to the original sample localities. 

Mathis' collected a  30  Qtem  sample  of sand from  each .depoait for lab­

oratory analysis.  Clay waa remo\red  by decantation.  The  sand-sized material 

was then .sieved for particle  size .analysis.  The  particle size  1/2 to  1/16 mm. 

was  used for heavy mineral determination.  The  minerals were .separated in, 

bromoform _(s. g.  2. 9)  and.were .then .mounted on slides for study o 

Mathis  used weathering characteristics of minerals .to give -an indica­

,:tion of the  age of the  terrace.  Hornblende  (s.g •.  2.9.-3.4) is less resistant to 

weathering than m.agnetite 1  ilmenite, ..  ohromite and cassiterite.  Mathis sug­

gested that a.  ratio of hornblende .to  these black opaques would be. smallest 

with the oldest deposita .and.  largest with the youngest since there  would be 

more. unaltered hornblende .remaining in the younger·deposits. 

The .results  obtained in the Austin area for the four me.jor  terrace• ·are 

as follows: 

Asylum 

Capitol 

Sixth Street 

First Street 

= 

= 

= 

= 

!25  = 

.0025 

lO.O 

1!0  = 
10.0 

.1 

71!5 
10.0 

43eZ 
10.0 

= 

.75 

=  4.37 

These .ratios as detennined by Mathis .do  not remain constant: for 1n­

·d.iv!dual terraces doWllstrea:m from  Austin but the relationships of the .-ratios 

11 

between..~r.raoea .J.n any .givan .area are . s1mllar .. 

The. two lowermost terraces oaused Mathis trouble .becauae no .'oonsia­

tent relationships could be .established between them.  Mathis . found  that in 

some .local.J.tles the  supposedly older Riverview Terrace .was  younger th.an.the 

San.dbea.ch Terrace .on the basis of. the. hornblende-opaques ratio e 

This·and  other anomalies in Mathis' data are  probably due .to the .fact 

.. that he .did not consider the .origin .of the .deposits.  Overlla.nk .and channel 

. deposits -are treated as one .in the  sampling.  Consequently, . the lower flight 

of .terraces which are .cut ill. the  overbank deposits  of the floodplain show 

fluctuating ratios that have .Uttle or no meaning. 

Also t·  no attempt was made. by Mathis to controLthe location of sampling 

in an.individual terrace.  Movement.of groundwater through the .ten'a.ce remnan:ta 

, is partially dependent on the  size .and shape  of ·the  terraoe .depoait1  height of 

the .-scarp,. the .lithology#  permeability 1  and also.on ,the .type  of  slopewash ·over­

lying the .terrace gravels.  Consequently,  major differences  may be present.in 

the degree .of weathering of samples .from  different parts .of the same  tet:race. 

This .is obvious in outcrops  of the  Capitol Terrace ;deposits at several locallties 

1n the Aus.tin area.  Samples .from these .areas are more .weathered than.some 

deposits  of the  older Asylum  Terrace.. 

Quinn in 1957.  published  ..Paired River Terraces .and Pleistocene  Glac1a­

tion11 #  a  study of the terraces of the Colorado RJ.ver  in the vicinity of Austin, 

Texas.  Based on meager fosa·U. evidence Quinn states.that aU terrace .deposits 

from  the Asylum  Terraoe.through the .floodplaJ.n are .of the same -age and :therefore 

2G 

t1a.e ;ume ;sa4-.atarr. episode.  ln his view the terraces ortgJ.Date . prior. to ~the 

depoai~;a..of.:!the-gravels by parallel retreat of  slopes .and ped1mentat1on. 

QuinJl then filla:the vall.ey carved by these  processes with a  single deposit 

of alluvium related to the  Sangamon interglacial period.  The  present .valley 

shape .is then .developed byrenewed downcutting of the  Colorado River whieh 

exhumes .some of the old terraces formed  originally by pedimentat1on. 

The  next study of the Colorado River .fluvial deposits  was done .by 

Urbanec :in 1963.  Urbanec and the .writer of this report had the ad.vantage ..of 

'detailed topographic mapa;: 1:62,500 and  1:24,000 in the Austin area and 

1:62.1 500 .along the  Colorado River.  These .allowed detailed mapping of the 

terraces,  first undertaken by Urbanec -in 19 61.  Urbaneo .mapped. the .area from 

just west of Austin to Webberville -about. 20  miles .downs.tream.  He  used a 

classification s1milar to that.of Weeks .(1945)  with the .exception that the

. 

Sandbeach Terrace .wa.s  classed as part of the present floodplain of the 

Colorado R,iver. 

Urbanec .showed that the Uthology of the -deposits and  the -slope .of 

St.  Elmo aench indicate .it.is a  deposit of a  tributary to the Colorado  (posaJhly 

Barton Creek prior to capture) and that the St.  Elmo  Bench .deposits are .not 

.part. of the  Uvalde Gravel Formation. 

Urbanec .also .originAlly discovered at locations  180,  181 a,nd  183 

(Plate I)  deposits of domiDAntly flint and chert gravel exposed below the 

limestone .gravel of St.  llmo Bench.  He .referred to .these .as the  Delaney 

Gravel,  a  nam6!  first proposed for surface .gravel.at location 180 by Mathia 

1n..l942 .(p.•  1,3)..- ~·• d.epoaita arb. unique.as they are .possibly the:hJ.gheat 

and old.eat reau.nta of ciepoaits  of.. the Colorado RJ.ver. 

21 

FORMATION  OF FLOODPLAINS 
THEIR RElATED  DEPOSITS AND  RlVER  TERRACES 

The. terraces of the Colorado River are remnants  of  surface• of lateral 

planation .covered by channel and overbank d$posits. 

The  process of floodplain formation by-lateral corraaion..is  stated by 

Mackin (1937 #  p.  826) in.h!s description of the origin.of the floodplain of 

the ·Shoshone River. 

Swift currents~ armed with .an .abundance of rock. fragments 1  impinge 
on. the shale. and .sandstone .banks.of the  stream at :the  outsd.de. of each 
curve#  and the  banks are  slowly worn back.  The -channel cross-secUon 
would thu•. be increased but for .the fact that,  ord1narlly#  a  compli­
mentary shoaling-and. filllng -takes  place on the opposite .aide of the 
channel,. 

Deposition oc;:curs  no more ..rapidly than erosion 1f the diacharge. and 

velocity of the  s.tream remain .constant over a  period of years._  During high 

water#.- however#.- ·the.chann.el.is enlarged both by deepening and widening. 

This  widening allows .the  materials in the channel to be reworked and as 

the floodwaters .subside .rapidly the coarsest materials .are the first deposited 

in the-channel.  So,  as .Mackin (1937,  p  826) . states: 

Thus .the gravels  of the. streams may be. effectively reworked and. 
sorted as to size.several times before the coarsest of them are finally 
more  or less pennanently incorporated into the broadening flOQdplain. 
The  floodplain gravel is,  therefore,  formed  as a  single ·sheet by 
lateral accretion; it is not really  ·a  floodwater deposit at all,  but a 
channel deposit;  its-maximum  possible thickne-ss,  in.a  stream that is 
not aggrading I  approaches .the. maximum depth of effective flood  S.90ur. 
It is often observed,  however,  that the  widening -and  deepeni~g of 
the channel during flood  periods ·fails  to accomodate  the increased .dis­
charge,  with the result that part,  or all,  of the  gravel  sheet is covered 
by floodwater. 

22 

When thls ·happens,  finer  grained materials ·are depos-ited from  sus­

pension on top of the ·channel deposits  until the  surface of the floodplain 

is built up to the  h~ghest level of floodwater. 

Thus, ·the ·floodplain is ·composed of two  parts ·distinctly different 

in origin.  The  gravel represents  the coarsest material -moved along 
the  stream channel and is characteristically unstratified.  The ·overly­
ing  silts and clays are  deposits  from  suspension,  and  they represent 
nearly the  finest material carried by the  stream.  (Mackin,  1937 ,p ..  826). 

This  concept of the  formation ·of floodplain deposits,  is consistent 

with the development of the  floodplain of the Colorado·River. 

The  First Street,  Riverview and Sandbeach  Terraces of Weeks  (1945, 

p.  1710)  are  parts  of the  floodplain as ·indicated by their being completely 

covered by the ·waters ·of the  1934 flood. 

The  lack of  downstream  continuity of the  Riverview and. Sandbeach 

Terraces  also indicates a  local origin.  The  lack of continuity is probably 

related to the  width of the valley floor.  The  narrowest  part of the  Colorado 

River floodplain is·at Austin ·where  the river emerges  from  the  Edwards  Plateau 

onto the  Coastal Plain;  the  two lowermost terraces· are  best developed in this 

area.  Downstream  where  the floodplain is extremely wide ·the  Riverview and 

Sandbeach Terraces  gradually become  less distinct and eventually disappear. 

It is  probable  that the  narrow floodplain in the Austin area restricted the  over­

flow during floods· and  kept the  water from  spreading out and  losing velocity .. 

Consequently the floodwaters ·were capable of cutting  sizeable :scarps -in  the 

overbank deposits.  Do'Wri.stream  where ·the ·floodplain  widens the overflow 

waters  spread widely,  consequently losing velocity and cutting power. 

24 

As, pointed out by ,other workers  (Stricklin,  1961)  it may be  possible to 

form  a  surface ~ of lateral planation concurrent with  downcutting;  the cut 

bedrock -plane ,underlying the  floodplain deposits  would  slope toward the 

cente.r of the valley as  well as  downriver.  This  special case, of floodplain 

formation may be represented in the Austin ·area by ·the ·Capitol and  Montopolis 

Terraces but evidence is lacking. 

~ormation of Terraces 

Terraces  are ·merely remnants ·of former floodplains ,of the river,  when 

the river was ,flowing  at a  higher level prior to· an, episode of downcutting.  A 

terrace ·is :a  physiographic feature· and associated with it are, the  floodplain 

deposits  of the river which formed  it.  Theoretically,  the depos-its  associated 

with  terraces · should be identical  with those of floodplains;  as Mackin (1937, 

p.  828-831)  points 'Out,  the  surface of floodplains  and terraces .may be covexed 

in part by depos~ts oftributary streams· and  slopewash.  The  shape of the 

terrace may be  greatly altered by these  side stream deposits.  Erosion is most 

vigorous  on. the frontal  scarp of a  terrace,  gradually lowering and wearing back 

the  scarp.  The  combination of erosion and deposition tends ·to destroy the 

shape  of the  terrace. 

In ·the .mapping  of terraces ,altitude has  been the most commonly ·· used 

criterion of correlation •  . Johnson  (1944,  p.  800)  restricts  the  use of altitude 

as ·follows: 

u  •'+·•  • in correlation studies  of either marine  or: fluviaLterraces  the 
only altitude figures  which can be  used properly are  those ·determined 
for  such  significant parts ·ofterraces·as ,bear a  known and fairly con­
stant relation to· former  water planes. 

25 

Only ·the top of the.. channel  gravel  (c.ontact  with  overbank deposit)  and 

the  beveled rock plane on which the  gravel rests are  of value  in correlation 

of terraces· formed  by lateral planation. 

In this  study of the  Colorado  Terraces ·attention was  focused  on the 

base ·of the channel gravels.  Altitudes  were  determined from  topograph-ic 

maps;  altimeters· were  ne>t  used.  Contacts  of the ·channel gravel  with the 

bedrock are  only ·rarely exposed,  but  the  use  of soil color and vegetation 

differences helped. in tracing contacts  through areas  of poor expe>sure. 

Surface  elevation,  shape,  and degree  of dissection of the  upper  surfaces  of 

the terrace  were  used only ·as  supplementary aids  in correlation and  mapping. 

TERMINOLOGY AND TERRACE  NAMES 

The  terraces· of the  Colorado  River have  been the·object of numerous 

·studies  with  a  resulting confusion· regarding  n.ames.  The ·author has ·retained 

earlier names  where  possible..  Two  new terms 1 .  Hornsby Terrace  and Monto~e>lis 

Terrace: have· been introduced for· two  previously unrecognized terraces • 

A terrace  is a  geomorphic  feature-a  flat  or nearly flat  surface bounded 

by  scarps.  Where the text deals  directly with the  terrace  deposits;  rather 

than the  topographic ·form  as  such 1  they are  called by the  terrace  name.  For 

example the deposits  of the Asylum  Terrace  are referred  to ·as ·the Asylum 

Terrace  deposits  or simply the Asylum  deposits .. As· indicated earlier· the 

deposits  on a  given terrace  may include  channel deposits 1  floodplain deposits 1 

and  side  stream  deposits;  other materials,. as  loe·s·s and caltche may also be 

present •. If the  channel gravel  is referred to  specifically it will  be  called by 

the  terrace  name.  For example  the Asylum  Terrace  gravel or Asylum  gravel. 

The  use  of lower case letters for these deposits is intended to  show that the 

names :are  used informally,  not as  formal  stratigraphic  terms. 

26 

DESCRIPTIVE  GEO~OGY 
FLUVIAL  DEPOSITS ··OF  THE· COLORADO  RIVER 

Manor Laa  Grayel 

The  term  M.anor  lag  gravel is  used here  for  a  widespread deposit of 

cobbles and  pebbles  in the  Colorado River drainage,  u.sually ·on the  tops · of the 

higher hills  or on. large,  relatively flat,  undissected  surfaces.  The· deposits 

range in .altitude from  580  to  615  feet  near  Manor to  600  to  680  feet  near 

Pflugerville •. No  lag gravel was  found  above  680  f~et (see Plates I and  n) ., 

The· gravel consists  of  chert and  quartz  cobbles  and  pebbles •.  In · some 

areas ·(sample  56)  there ·are  large  numbers · of  Upper Cretaceou.s· limestone 

cobbles· associated with  the  deposit, . but these· are · apparently remnants  of 

deposits  of tributaries  to  the  Colorado.  The  cobbles· and  pebbles  are  exposed 

on the' surface· and are ·associated with  the  soil zones. 

The  gravel  is best developed on  the  outcrop belt of  the  Taylor· Marl. 

Consequently the cobbles ·and  pebbles· are  imbedded  in the  chernozem  soil 

of  the Taylor Marl. At  the base of  the  "A"  horizon,  .which is  2  1/2 to  4 feet 

thick,  there  is a  concentration of  caliche and  clay leached from  the  "A" 

horizon.  The  lag gravel is usually found  in· ~e top  2 to  3 feet  of  the  "A" 

horizon,  but.individual cobbles· are  sometimes  found  deeper. 

The  lag gravel is formed ·in situ by  erosional  processes from  terrace 

deposits.  Finer grained  sands,  silts,  and clays· are more  easily removed  by 

erosion and are  consequently winnowed  out,  leaving behind the  pebbles  and 

cobbles.  The  cobbles· and  pebbles,  however,  do  not remain in their original 

27 

28 

·stratigraphic pqsition.  Associated with  the  winnowing  out of the fine 

grained sediments ·is a : varying  amount of horizontal and vertical movement, 

mostly vertical by the  coarse fragments.  The  eleyation of .a  surface :covered 

by lag  gravel,  therefore, . has  little  significance and  is of little value in 

correlation,  The  upper limit above  which  lag gravel  is not found,  680  feet 

near Austin,  is an indication,  however,  of the  altitude and  the  north  limlt of 

the valley floor on which  the  gravel was  deposited. 

Th~ name  Manor lag gravel is  used by the  writer to describe deposits 

in the Colorado River drainage  which have  been generally referred to as the 

Uvalde  Gravel or Uvalde  Formation.  The  term  Uvalde  Formation was  originally 

used for coarse gravel deposits I  the type  section of  which is  200-2 50  miles 

to the  Southwest of Austin 

From  San Antonio  westward to  Del Rio  and  thence  southwestward 
through Mexico to an indefinite distance  coastward beyond Lampazos I 
Mexico I  included between the  eastward escarpment of the Comanche 
Series  plateau of Carnal,  Uvalde,  Medine  and  Maverick Counties  and 
the  Santa Rosa  Mountain G~oup of  Mexico at an elevation of  400 to  1000 
feet  above  the. Rio  Grande,  there  are  preserved many remnants  of a 
grand detrital deposit of either a  fresh  water  lake or gr.eat  embayment 
of the  Gulf  which  existed in comparatively recent Tertiary or Quater­
nary time.  Terraces,  benches ·and remnental  patches  of this  material 
are found  around the  perimeter of the  whole  area in great thickness·, 
while  estaurine .embayments  extend far  up  the canyons  of the  streams 
flowing  into it from  the mountains. 
Formation for ·these  terraces.  (Hill,  1891,  p; 368) 

I  propose  the  name  Uvalde 

The  name  Uvalde  Formation thus  describes  the  terraces,  gravel,  and 

other related deposits  of the  southwesternmost portion of the  Coastal Plain 

and refers  specifically;to drainage  basins other than that of the  Colorado 

River. 

29 

Later workers,  including Hill and Vaughn. (1896-9.7,  p.  244);  Duessen 

(.1930,.  p.  lll.and.Plate VIII);  and Weeks  (1945,  p.  1704-1707) have  used this 

tenn to· describe high. standing deposits  of  stream gravel on. the  Coastal 

Plain.  As  defined.,  the·term  Uvalde :Formation would be applicable to every 

terrace·deposit in·the·Rio  Grande,. Nueces,  Medina and Guadalupe drainage 

basins:,  and also· possibly the other drainages· of the  Coastal Plain•. It .is 

difficult to restrict the ·name to the  11 high 11  gra~el deposits· as the· altitudes 

of these deposits vary both within and between .drainage basins. 

The  writer suggests that: 

1•. The  drainage ,bas:in of each of the·major rivers  of the  Coastal Plain 

is· a  separate  system and .sh0uld be treated as  such. 

2 • . Except possibly where :obvious :drainage :changes· have· occuttedt all 

formation or terrace names· should be restricted to a  particular drainage; 

correlations .between .drainage basins·are·in·order·where  justified by. evidence. 

The  following  observations. made  while· mapping. the :Manor lag gravel 

could. possibly·help·future workers. 

The  foundation and base:materials of many roads  on the interstream 

divides:in the Colorado·drainage·are·composed of  siliceous  stream gravels· 

trucked in for that  specific purpose.  Frequently· a  large percentage ,of  cobbles 

and  pebbles  will either be  strewn or distributed alongside· roads and as far as 

50  feet out into the  fields·. and. these ~areas :may 'look identical to '&reas ·of 

Manor lag gravel.  It is therefore  necessary to make. ones ·observations. a 

cons.iderable· distance from  main roads •.  If the ·percentage ·of cobbles present 

·30 

in the soil decreases·rapidly as one moves  out from  the road then the cobbles 

are · probably·· not in place,  but are  most likely·associated with the construction 

of .the road. 

Gravel pits :marked on .topographic ,maps·orwhich -one may,leam-of by 

word · of mouth from  local citizens ·are ·often not gravel pits at all.  In ·many 

areas· the :impure ·limestones· of the Austin Group· are crushed .and  used in 

aggregates ·the ·same way as  gravel,  hence·the use of the term  gravel pit. 

In summation,  the·Manor lag gravel is restricted in· altitude· and in 

areal extent in the ,Colorado -drainage.  The .composition -and  grain size  (Fig. 14) 

is· similar to that of other:Colorado River terraces  and. the gravel is at an alti­

tude  only  slightly 'lower than the· altitude of the  Delaney Terrace deposits •  The 

Manor lag gravel is probably the deeply weathered and eroded remnant of a 

. former floodplain of the  Colorado River and is ·probably correlative with the 

Delaney Terrace deposits.  There  is · no :method  of determining their exact age 

as·no·fossils have  been·found in the deposits. 

Delaney Terrace· Deposits 

The  term  Delaney gravel was :first  used by Mathis  (l942,  p.  13)  to 

describe chert,  quartz, ·and  plutonic pebbles ·and cobbles · found  on ·the  surface 

near St.  Elmo· Bench  (loc.  180,  Plate I) •. Mathis  thought they were  probably 

lag  gravelor slope  wash from  the St.- Elmo  Bench deposits  which he con­

sidered to be ·part of the  Uvalde  Formation. 

Urbanec  (1963,  p.  38-39) discovered two localities ·in· which gravel 

composed of quartz,  chert and plutonic clasts  was  exposed in place· under 

31 

the  St.  Elmo  Bench deposits  (loc.  181  and  183,  Plate I). 

At  location  183  a  well defined 2  foot  bed of very coarse cobble :ceoglom­

erate .is exposed near the  base .of a  cut.  The ·cobbles  are  composed  of quartz, 

quartzite,  chert and.  some  deeply weathered  plutonic·rock fragments.  The 

·litholagy ·is distinct from  that of the St.  Elmo  Bench. gravel  which contains:.less 

than 2%  quartz  while  the ·Delaney,Terrace ·deposit contains· approximately· 20% 

quartz -cobbles.  (see. Appendix this·.report).  The .2%  of quartz·and also ·the ·l% 

of plutonic  pebbles  in·.  the: St •.  Elmo· Bench deposits could only be derived from 

reworking . deposits  of the ·Colo.rado ·River as ·the ·stream which· formed .St ..  Elmo 

Bench  (Barton Creek)  does  not head in the Centrat' Mineral Region. 

The · above ·described  unit of the  Delaney Terrace  deposits· is ove·rlain 

by 2  to  3  feet of deeply weathered .marly material  which  grades ·upward  into less 

deeply weathered gravel of St.  Elmo  Bench.  The  overlying gravel is ·finer 

grained and composed largely of chert and  limestone ·pebbles. 

The  relationships  at location  181 are not clear as the  Delaney ·Terrace 

deposits ·are ·poorly exposed in .shallow pits  (4  to . 6 ·feet. deep). · Near the.base 

of the  pits· are deeply weathered  pebbles of quartz .and  plutonic· rocks.  The 

quartz  pebbles  and  plutonic rock fragments. both exhibit leaching  with the 

development of rinds  of  porous,  spongy silica on the. quartz .fragments: while 

the  plutonic rock fragments .have ·mostly broken .apart and  disintegrated.due  to 

weathering of the mafic· rpinerals • . Uphill from  the  O"~Jtcrops ·of  the· Delaney 

Terrace ·deposits· are·exposures·of the .St.- Elmo  Bench deposits ·which are ·also 

deeply weathered. 

. 32 

These two locations ·are ·the·only  "in place ..  exposures  of the  Delaney 

Terrace.deposits  known;  the  outcrop  pattern  shown on the map  (Plate  I)  is 

largely hypothetical. 

Although  not exposed .at  181  or  183  the  altitude  of the base  of the 

· Delaney~  Terrace  deposits ·can be·· approximated  as being  about  650-660  feet 

near  183  and about  670-680 feet  near  181.  This  approximation is based on·the 

altitude ·of outcrops  of Cretaceous  limestone  in the immediate vicinity.  On·.the 

basis of similarity in·altitude :and  lithology the  writer thinks  that the. Delaaey 

Terrace  deposits.. may; be correlative to the · Manor lag gravel •  . The · Delaney 

Terrace deposits  have been preserved by burial under the  St.  Elmo  deposits 

while  the :Manor lag gravel is a  remnant of the  Delaney·Terrace ·deposits  which 

have been largely destroyed by weathering and  erosion. 

Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 

Hill and Vaughn  (1896-97 '· p. · 249)  defined the Asylum  Terrace as 

II 

•  the  sandy post-oak 'flat  in the  northern  part of the  city upon  which  the 

lunatic  asylum  stands...  The  altitude · of  the base  of  the  terrace  gravel  is · ap~ 

proximately  590  to  610  feet  in the Austin.area.  Near Bastrop  the  altitude-is 

approximately  500  feet.  As  best as can be determined  the·height of the ·base 

of the  gravel  is consistently  180  to  190  feet above  the  present river  (see 

Plates I  and  ll). 

The  shape  of  the  terra,ce .has  been greatly altered by erosion and dep­

osition and consequently the  upper  surface  of the  terrace deposits vary widely 

in elevation.  Thickness  of the  terrace  deposits vary widely depending  upon 

33 

Fig.  2 

Asylum  Terrace  gravel as exposed at sample  location 98 
on Park  Springs  Bench.  Strong  development of caliche con­
centrated as a  case hardening effect.  Base  not  exposed. 
View to the  southwest. 

34 

the  amount of either deposition or erosion.  The  channel gravel where  observed 

has  a  maximum  thickness  0f  15  to  20  feet  in the Austin area. 

Detailed lithology of  samples  collected from  the Asylum  Terrace  gravel 

is  presented in the Appendix..•. The  channel gravel  is made  up  of cobbles  and 

pebbles  in a  matrix of medium  to fine  sand  (Fig.  12).  Approximately  40  to  50% 

of the  sample  is  larger than -1. 00  ~ (gravel or larger~ 

The  gravel is composed of chert,  quartz  and  plutonic  pebbles.  With the 

exception of  sample  163  limestone  pebbles  were  absent from  the 'Samples  (Figs. 

16  and  17 and Appendix) . 

The  terrace  and its gravel deposits  are  present on both sides of the 

Colorado  River  and  are  best preserved north of the  river at the Austin Munici­

pal Airport,  at Park  Springs  Bench,  and  at Bastrop  Park.  South of the river 

the  terrace  gravel  is well  exposed in the  vicinity of Wilbargers  Bend. 

The  term  Bastrop  Park  Terrace  (Weeks  1945,  p  1703)  refers  to a  terrace 

remnant  which  is correlative  with the Asylum  Terrace  and  not  older as 

previously inferred. 

Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 

East of Austin between Walnut and Gilleland Creeks  is exposed a  de­

posit of relatively fine  grained terrace  gravel.  The  altitude of the  base of this 

gravel  is  higher than that of the  Capitol  Terrace  gravel  and lower than the 

base of the Asylum  Terrace  gravel  indicating a  terrace deposit  previously un­

recognized.  As  it is best exposed in the vicinity of the  crossroads of Hornsby 

the  writer  proposes  the  name  Hornsby Terrace  gravel  for  this  deposit. 

35 

Pigo  3 

Capitol Terrace  de.posits  exposed at location  79.  The  base I 

covered by  slope  wash and  debris 1  is approximated by the 
dashed  line.  Contact of overbank deposits  (fine  grained·, 
reddish color)  with  channel gravel indicated by dot-dash 
line .  View to  the  west . 

36 

The· altitude of the  base  of the  gravel decreases  from  530  - 540  feet 

near Austin to  440  - 450  feet  near Hemphill  Bend  six·.miles  northwest of 

Bastrop.  The  height of the  base of the  gravel  above  the  Colorado River de­

creases  slightly from  140  - 145. feet at Austin to  120  - 125  feet at Hemphill 

Bend. 

The  Hornsby gravel is thin and  poorly exposed with a  maximum  ob­

served thickness of 15  feet.  The  gravel  is finer  grained than the Asylum 

Terrace  gravel  and other  Colorado• River  terrace  deposits  including the  flood­

plain.  Less than 35%  of all  samples  is gravel  size or coarser (Appendix and 

Fig.  11). 

Lithologically the· Hornsby  gravel is  nearly identical to the Asylum 

gravel  except that the  Hornsby  gravel contains  a  higher percentage· of plutonic 

rock fragments.  With the  exception of  sample  164  limestone fragments  were 

absent from  the  samples  (Figs.  16  and  17  and. Appendix). 

The  Hornsby gravel  is generally not well exposed and does  not form 

surfaces  of large  areal extent.  It has  not been identified  south of the· river. 

Erosion and  the· deposition of  slope  wash on· the  surface  of the· terrace  have 

in most  areas  destroyed the terrace ·scarp. 

Capitol Terrace  Deposits 

The  name  Capitol  Terrace ·was  first  used by Hill  and Vaughn  (1896-97, 

p.  250)  to  describe  the  flat  upon  which the  state capitol building is con­

structed. 

The  gravel  is  well exposed and  the  terrace  well developed in the 

37 

Fig.  4 

Capitol Terrace  gravel is expos­
ed  at location  79.  Gravel is  strong­
ly cemented by CaC03.  Note  that 
many  cobbles  have coatings of 
CaC03  and  CaC03  cemented  sandy 
matrix. 

I_ 

Fig.~~ -~-~-~---~ 

Another view of  same  exposure 
(location  79).  Note  development 
of overhanging  ledges  (a  feature 
found  only in these  outcrops  of 
the  Capitol Terrace  gravel)  due 
to  extensiv·e  cementation by 
CaC03.  View to the  north. 

38 

vicinity of Austin. but only one  small  remnant is found  downriver near Onion 

Creek. ·  The  base of the  gravel  is well exposed in high bluffs· east of Austin 

near sample  locations  79  and  179  and is  90  - 100  feet  above  the  Colorado 

River  at an altitude  of ·500  feet.  The maximum  observed thickness of channel 

gravel  at locations  79  and  179  is approximately  40  feet. 

The -Capitol Terrace  gravel  is  a  deposit far coarser than the  older 

gravel de:posits • . Approximately  70%  of each  sample  is  gravel  sized or 

coarser (greater than .-1. 00  ~ units  in diameter- see Appendix and Figs.  10 

and  1'5) • . Lithologically the  Capitol gravel differs  radically from  the  older 

Asylum  and Hornsby gravels  in that the  Capitol Terrace  gravel  contains  65% 

limestone  clasts 

(Fig.  16). 

These cha-nges  in grain size and  lithology between the  Asylum  and 

Hornsby  gravels  and the  Capitol gravel indicate  a  major change in the  regimen 

of the  stream and the  rock type  available in the  drainage  basin. 

Montopolis  Terrace  Deposits 

Between Montopolis  and :Bergstrom Air  Force  Base  south of the  river ie 

a  thick terrace  deposit,  the  base of which  is lower in altitude than the  Capitol 

gravel  and  higher than the Sixth Street gravel;  it is  here  designated  the 

Montopolis  Terrace  gravel. 

The  base of the  gravel  is exposed at an altitude  of  450-460  feet  south­

east of Montopolis  and  385-395  feet  near Bastrop.  The  height of the base  of 

the  Montopolis  gravel  above  the  Colorado· River increases  from  45  - 60  feet at 

Austin to  65  - 75  feet  dowmiver near Bastrop.  Thickness  of the ·gravel  where 

exposed near Montopolis  is ·approximately. 3 0 feet.  Downstream  at Powell 

39 

Bend,  neat Bastrop,  the  maximum thickness  is  35  - 40  feet. 

ln .thickness,  grain  size,  and  lithology the  Montopolis  gravel is •dis­

similar to-the Asylum  and.Hornsby  gravel but almost identical to the  Capitol 

gravel.  Sixty five -percent of the· sample .is gravel or larger (Fig.  10)  and lith­

ologically the .sample  is composed of  63%  limestone  clasts I  28%  siliceous 

clasts,  and  a  minor amount of plutonic rock fragments  (Fig.  16). 

Because  of the  few exposures  it is difficult to determine  the ·shape and 

slo~e of the  bedrock surface  under the  Montopolis ·and  Capitol gravel in a  cross 

valley section.  Stricklin. (1961)  concludes  that a  normal  feature  of the Brazos 

River  as ·it was ·cutting its  present valley is the formation  of bedrock  surfaces, 

covered with  stream deposits  that  slope toward the center of the  valley;  he 

attributes  them  to  lateral planation concurrent with degradation. 

It  seems  possible from  the  distribution of outcrops  and  the ·almost 

identical lithology,  grain  size I  and  thickness  of the  gravel that the ·Capitol and 

Montopolis  Terraces  were  formed  by . a  degr,ding- stream._  As  the  stream  moved 

both laterally and degraded its  bed the  reg1men did  not change;  hence  the  simi­

larity in the  lithology of  the  deposits  and the  absence of  pairing of the  terraces. 

The  Montopolis  Terrace  is  paired in the  narrowest  part of the  Colorado River 

Valley just northwest of Bastrop.  These  two  terraces 1  however,  apparently-have 

slightly differing altitudes  at the  base of the  terrace  gravel,  a  feature  possibly 

attributable  to  degradation combined  with  lateral plq.nation. 

Sixth Street Terrace -Deeosits 

The  name  Sixth.Street Terrace  was  proposed by Weeks  (1945 ,p.  1708) 

-

-

-----, 

Fig.  6 

40 

Montopolis  Terrace  gravel  ex­
posed in pit at  sample  location 
174.  Large  boulder is approxi­
mately  2  1/2  feet  long.  Note  lack 
of development of caliche or ex­
tensive  cementation.  Also  note 
torrential eros s  bedding in finer 
grained beds.  View to the  south­
east. 

Fig.  7 

Deposits  of the  Colorado River 

floodplain  at  sample  location 
160A.  Note  extreme  variability 
of  grain  size I  coarseness 1  and 
lack of caliche development. 
View to  the  north. 

41 

for a  series  of narrow elongated flats  in the  center of Austin which  are  traversed 

along most of the.ir length by Sixth Street.  The  terrace  is  still easily recognized_ 

in east Austin,  but the  gravel is not  exposed in Austin. 

This  is the  lowest terrace  level  distinctly above  the  floodplain;  the  base 

of the  channel gravel is approximated as  the  same  altitude  as  the  surface  of 

the  floodplain.  West of Austin near the Austin Municipal  Golf Course  the 

Sixth Street Terrace  grayel  is well  exposed  with the  base  at an altitude  of about 

450  - 460  feet  and  about  40  feet  above  the  river . .:  Downstream  near  Utley and 

at sample  location  173  the  altitude  of the base  of the  terrace  gravel  is  410 to 

420  feet.  The  maximum  observed thickness  of terrace  gravel  was· approximately 

20  feet. 

The  grain size distribution of .the  Sixth Street gravel  is almost  identical 

to those  of the  Capitol and Montopolis  gravels;lmore  than  65%  of the  sample 

was  gravel  sized or coarser  (Fig.  10) _:,, Lithologically the  sample  of the  Sixth 

Street gravel  from  location  173  differs  radically from  the  Montopolis  and  Capitol 

gravels.  While  the -Montopolis  and  Capitol gravel is characterized by high  per­

.. 

. 

centages  of limestone  clasts  (65%)  the  Sixth Street gravel  contains  no  limestone 

clasts. 

As  the  Six.th Street gravel  is  poorly  exposed  it is  difficult to. confirm  this 

and  it is  probable  that the  sample  from  location  173  is  not rep~esentative of ·the 

terrace  as  a  whole. 

Floodplain Deposits 

The -Colorado floodplain  is·a  broad surface  exhibiting numerous  features 

42 

typical of  stream erosion and depos-ition.  Bars  are  common in the  channel of 

the  river,  while  scourroutes  (Thornbury,  1954,  p.  167),  meander  scars,  oxbow . 

swamps,  and the ridge  and  swale topography of point bar deposits  are  common 

on the  floodplain~J  Despite the  presence of many minor,  discontinuous  terraces 

the floodplain is regarded as one  depositional  unit representing a  stream flow­

ing at or near grade  for  an extended period of time;  it has  not been subdivided 

in the mapping. 

The  thickness of the floodplain deposits  over the entire valley is  un­

known,  but there is data on the channel of the  Colorado River  west of Barton 

Creek,  where the valley floor  is extremely narrow.  The  data  were  made · avail­

able by Mr. _Ed  Marten of Capitol Aggregates  and consists  of  generalized logs 

of 58  boreholes  in the  channel. 

The  data  indicates  that the base of the channel gravel is an irregular 

surface  showing deep  scours  in some  areas  and bedrock-highs  in others •  The 

total thickness  of the  deposits  is therefore variable . depending on the  presence 

of th~se features  and  the thickness of overbank deposits.  The  thickness  of 

the  Colorado valley floor deposits  ranges  from  50  to  70  feet • . 

The  floodplain  ~ravels (Appendix  and  Fig.  9)  are  extremely coarse ·and 

composed dominantly of limestone  pebbles  (Fig.  16).  In these features  the 

floodplain deposits  are  similar to the  Montopolis ·and  Capitol terrace  gravels. 

The  geologic map  and a  longitudinal  profile  of the: floodplain  (Plates 

I  andii)  show that the  height of the  top  of the  floodplain above  the  present 

level of the ·river is somewhat greater near Bastrop than in the vicinity of Austin; 

43 

at Austin the ·highest floodplain deposit is 30 to  40  feet  above  the nonnal river 

level while  near Bastrop the  highest floodplain deposits  are  55  to  60 feet above 

the river. 

Also the-width of the floodplain  (see Plate I)  is less near Bastrop than 

along the  stretch of river between Austin and Bastrop.  This  is because resist­

ant sandstones,  silts,  and "~hales ,of·Lower-Tertiary age  at Bastrop. have re­

stricted the  lateral  planation of the  Colorado IUver more  than the .softer Upper 

Cretaceous chalks and marls  of the Austin and Taylor Groups  upstream. 

Deposits ·of Tributaries. to the  ColOrado River 

Walnut Creek deposits  were mapped as floodplain,  low terrace deposits 

and high terrace deposits.  Because of poor exposure ·and extensive  erosion 

and weathering of the marly terrace deposits,  contacts ·are  approximate.  I,ith­

ology and grain size distributions  of these deposits  are distinctive as they are 

fine  grained and contain lq.rge  quantities of Upper Cretaceous:limestone and 

marl. 

The St.  Elmo Bench gravel was  mapped as ·a  deposit of Barton Creek. 

Urbanec  (1963)  suggested that Barton Creek originally flowed  down St.  Elmo 

Bench,  but was  captured by a  small tributary streq.m  flowing  directly to the 

Colorado.  The  capturing  stream was  probably subsequent eroding ·headward 

along a  branch of the Balcones  Fault Zone.  As  Barton .Springs,  with a  present 

peak discharge of 50,000,000 gallons  per day,  is  situated along this ·same 

fault  zone between St.  Elmo  Bench and the  Colorado River it is likely that the 

capture may have been aided by spring sapping. 

44 

Terrace · deposits  of other minor creeks ·were ·not mapped. 

Longitudinal  Profile  of the  Colorado River  and its Terraces 

Mapping of the terrace deposits  in the  Colorado River Valley and  plot­

ting  of their  profiles  above  that of the  river  (Plate  II)  indicates  the  following: 

The  altitude  and  gradient of the  Delaney Terrace  as  best as  can be 

approximated 1  appears  to  be  colinear with  the  highest development of Manor . 

lag  gravel;  this  rough  correspondence  suggests  that both deposits  were  part 

of the  same  Colorado River valley floor  and  possibly of the  same  age. 

The  profiles  of the  lower terraces  diverge  from  the  profile  of the  Col­

orado River  near Bastrop.  The  divergences  are  small and may  be  a  function of 

slight inaccuracies  during mapping I  inaccuracies  in the  topographic  map  or  . 

faulty  correlation.  The  profiles  of the  base of  the Asylum  and Hornsby gravel 

remain roughly  parallel to  the  profile · of  the  river while  the  Montopolis ·and 

Sixth Street gravel  seem  to  diverge  slightly downstream 1  being  higher above 

the  present river at Bastrop than Austin. 

Over as  short a  segment of river as  that  studied it is  impossible to 

draw conclusions  as to the  significance of the  divergence.  It might indicate 

Pleistocene movement  on the Luling Fault Zone;  which  passes through the 

vicinity of Bastrop and  creates  a  zone  of gentle · arching  in the  subsurface. 

Remnants  of the Sixth Street and  Capitol  gravels  are  continuous  a 

short distance  into  the  Edwards  Plateau and  cross branches  of the Balcones 

Fault Zone.  There  is  no  evidence to indicate  any  post terrace movements  on 

the Balcones  Fault Zone •  . In this  connectic:>n it may  be  noted .that Bryan 

(1933,  1936)  is ·of the opinion that evidence in the Waco  area indicates recent 

movement on the Balcones  Fault Zone,  while the  work  of Stricklin (1961)  on the 

terraces of the  Brazos  River  indicates  no  recent movement .. 

45 

LITHOLOGIC  AND  MECHANICAL  ANALYSIS 
OF  TERRACE  GRAVELS 

Because  of difficulty in correlating the  Colorado  terraces  on the  basis 

of  altitude,  the  writer attempted to determine  properties  of  the  terrace  gravels 

that might be  useful  in identifying individual terraces.  Samples  were  collected 

from  the  floodplain  and terraces  and  subjected to  both mechanical and  lithologic 

analysis  (See  the Appendix,  Figs.  9  - 17  and  Plate  I  for  sample  data and  loca­

tions). 

S;mpling Procedure 

Samples  were  chiefly collected from  channel  gravels;  except for  two 

localities,  overbank deposits  were  not  sampled. 

Channel  gravels  were  sampled because they are the  coarsest part of 

the valley floor  deposit and  are  the  normal  accretionary deposit of a  stream 

engaged in lateral corrasion at or  near grade.  As  the  channel  gravels  may  be 

effectively reworked  and  sorted  as  to  size  several times  before  being  perm­

anently deposited,  it  seems  that they  should best represent the  hydraulic con­

dition of the  stream  over a  long  period  of time.  Overbank deposits,  or other 

surficial flood  deposits,  which  make  up the  upper  surface  of  most floodplains 

and  terraces,  repre.sent the  sus:pended  load,  and  ~re not  comparable  with  the 

channel deposits  formed  at the  same  time. 

Because  the  samples · are  composed  of  coarse  gravel,  the  size  of the 

sample  had to be considerably larger than samples  from  medium  and fine  grain­

ed  sediments.  If  the  coarsest clasts  in a  sample  are  pebble-sized,  the  weight 

of a  representative  sample  should range  from  2- 16  kg.  (4.4  to  35.2  pounds). 

46 

47 

If the  coarsest clasts are  cobble-sized the  sample  should  weigh in excess of 

32  kg.  (70. 4  pounds)  (Krumbein  and Pettijohn,  1938,  p.  32). 

All  samples collected from  deposits  of the  Colorado River exceeded 

35  pounds.  Only four  samples  collected from  tributaries  were  less than 35 

pounds  (See Appendix) . 

Samples  were  collected from  vertical cuts  in the  walls ·of gravel  pits, 

excavations 1  etc;  the ·alluvium  was  caught on a  large canvas ·laid at the base 

of the  cut.  Use ·of the  canvas allowed a  complete  sample  to  be  collected with 

only minor loss I  if any I  of the  finer  grained fractions.  Samples  were -taken so 

·as 'to.be representative of the  deposit as a  whole. 

Mechanical Analysis 

The  writer constructed a  set of  screens  to  separate  the  sample  into five 

size fractions.  The  screens  were  14  inches  square  and the  sizes  were:  less 

than  1/8 inch;  1/8  - 1/4 inch;  1/4  - 1/2  inch;  1/2  - 1 inch;  and  1  - 2  inch. 

Clasts  larger than  2 inches  were  hand  sized into fractions  2  - 4  inches;  4  - 8 

inches;  and larger than 8  inches.  The  fraction  which  passed through  the 

1/8 inch  screen was  not analysed further. 

The  total  sample  was  weighed  prior to  separation.  After  separation 

each fraction  was  weighed and  the  weights  totaled to check for  possible 

material loss.  All  weighing was  done  to  the  nearest  1/2  ounce.  In a  fifty 

pound  sample I  measure~ent to  1/2  ounce  is accurate  to  6/100 of one  percent. 

Total  weight  loss during analysis of the  samples  was  held  in all cases to  con­

siderably less than one  half of one  percent of the  total  samp~e.  The ·weights 

48 

and the  weight  percents of each fraction were  recorded for  each sample • 

. No  attempt was ; made· to measure· roundness,  sphericity,  or other 

parameters of  particle morphology. 

Lithologic Analysis 

Lithologic analysis· was restricted to pebbles of the  1/2 inch and-larger 

fractions •  Each  pebble was  examined megascopically and classified into one 

of the following  categories.:  plutonic; . crystalline· quartz;  limestone;  chert, 

flint,  or other amorphous  silica; metamorphic;  clastics  (including fossils, 

shale 1  mudballs I  etc.); and  unidentifiable.  The  weight percents for  each 

lithologic fraction were  recorded for  each sample  (See Appendix ·and Figs.  11 

and  12).  Another  parameter determined for  all  samples  was  the total weight 

percent of  siliceous clasts I  including all forms ·of quartz 1  quartzite 1  chert, 

flint,  etc. 

MECHA:NlCAL ANALYSIS:- INTERPRETATION  OF  RESULTS 

Two  samples: from  the channel deposits  in which  the· tractions ·smaller 

than .l/8: inch were -analysed,  indicate that Cole>rado  River  sediments  consist 

of a  bimodal mixture  of pebble  gravel  and medium  sand.  The . sediments 

sh<Dwed  the  same lack of  sedimentary particles in the  range  +1. 0 to  -1. 0  4>  as 

noted by other workers  in studies  of other areas  (See  Folk,  1961,  p.  5;  and 

Folk and Ward,  1957,  p .. · 4).  As  a  result the  writer restricted his :detailed  stud­

ies ·to the  coarser mode  (larger than -1 •0 +>  and  standard  statistical analysis 

as outlined by Folk  (1961,  pp ..  43-63)  could· not be used.  The  results  were 

plotted in phi  units  on . cumulative  curves  (see  Figs.  9 - 15)  with  the  follow­

ing results. 

¥alley· floor Samples 

Analysis  of  seven samples  showed  no  distinct shape or apparent 

cluster on  the  cumulative  curves.  Samples  l60A,  B,  and  C and.16l.A,. B 1 

and  C  (see Appendix and  Fig .  9)  were  all collected near the  surface of  the 

valley floor 1  and  are  either overbank of flood  channel deposits of the  Colorado 

River.  Sample  162  was  collected in a  gravel  pit below a  series of  silt and  clay 

overbank .deposits -and  is probably a  sample  from  the  channel gravel of the 

Colorado R1ver. 

The  coarser modes  of both  the  channel  gravel  and  the · overbank :deposits 

on . the· valley floor  are .very  similar in . the  range  in .size of the · pebbles :and 

cobbles •.  They  differ significantly 1  however, _in the  proportion of the  total 

sample . that composes  the  coarser mode.  As -indicated by Figs.  7 and  9 the 

49 

50 

overbank deposits  of the  Colorado River are· a  mixture  of sands ·and  silts with 

scattered  stringers of pebble· and cobble conglomerate.  Near the present river 

the  overbank deposits  are ·coarser and more ·variable·than in exposures ·on ·the 

floodplain  which are  well back· from  the river.  The ·.deposits -of the floodplain 

near the  present channel indicate that floods  have the  power to carry large ·cal­

iber material;  but as the chC)nnel  slowly migrates  these flood channel deposits 

are  eventually reworked out of the ·section.  The -vicinity of the-channel on the 

floodplain is  therefore· ~n,  area of depositional flux and does  not represent the 

true  nature of the  channel or overbank deposits  as  such. 

Six.th. Street,  Montopolis,. and Capitol Terrace  Deposits 

As  indicated by the  cumulative  curves  (Figs.  10 and  15) the  samples 

o.ollected from  these terraces ·are ·similar and.are distinctly different from  the 

older Hornsby ·and Asylum  gravels. 

All  of these  samples  are very coarse I  with greater than 60%  of each 

sample being in the  coarser mode  (larger than -1.00 ~ ) .  These three deposits 

also exhibited  sim-ilar  thicknesses 1  approximately 40 to  50  feet in ·the vicinity 

of Austin.  This  is considerably thicker than the Asylum  and Hornsby deposits 

which range -from  20 to 30 feet  in maximum  thickness.  The  three·terraces-are 

also closely grouped  in altitude  with the:Montopolis  Terrace being ·2.0 feet 

higher than the  Sixth Street Terrace,  and the Capitol Terrace· 35  feet higher than 

the  Montopolis  Terrace.  The  exact relationship between·these  terraces is not 

clear but it is evident that there· were  no  major changes ·in the' regimen of the 

Colorado while  they were .being cut. 

Hornsby Terrace ·DeQosits 

51 

As  indicated.by..the·mechanical analysis  (Figs.  11 .and  15)  the· Hornsby 

Terrace  deposits  are  the  finest  grained of any of the  terrace -deposits  of the 

Colorado  River.  While  the  range  in particle  size  is as  great as  the  other 

terraces,  only  12%  to  28%  of the  entire  sample  falls  into  the  coarser mode 

(greater than - 1. 00 <j>). 

The  shape  and  plot of the  five  samples  all fall  into  a  narrow band on the 

cumulative curve  and  are  distinct from  the  plots  of any other terraces.  The  five 

samples -were collected,  up  to  15  miles  apart,  from  terrace ·deposits  correlated 

on the  basis  of altitude. 

Asylum  Terrace  De.oosits 

Plots  of five  samples -from  the Asylum  gravel  (Figs.  12  and  15)  fall  into 

a  narrow band on the  cumulative  curves  which also differs  from  the  plots  of 

other samples  As ·with the  Hornsby Terrace,  these  samples  were  collected up

o 

to  15  miles ·apart  (see  Plate  I)  from  terrace  remnants  correlated on altitUde. 

The  range  in grain  size .of the Asylum  gravel is similar to .that of the 

other terrace  gravels.  The  coarser mode,  however,  comprises  42  to  52%  of the 

total  sample.  This  is  as  compared  to  12  to  28%  for  the  Hornsby  gravel  and  6.6 

to  72%  for  the ·Montopolis ,  Sixth Street and  Capitol gravels o 

In this respect 

the Asylum  Terrace  plots between the  Hornsby and the  three  lower terraces. 

(see  Fig  15)o

o 

Sample  163  contained a  single large limestone  boulder .approximately 

seven inches  in dia,meter.  This boulder appeared anomalous  as  it was  the 

52 

Ut 
: Ji  :i l 

IJ 
i: 

fi, 

8 

Table  1. 

!:II 
id!  I 
:  ; 

;; 

I 

: 

~~ 

li 

T 

z. 

CONVERSION 'i:'ABLES 

ct> 

UNITS 

MM. 

INCHES 

1­

INCHES 

<I>  UNITS 

I 

II 
I'

-~ 
•.,, 

·Table  1.  Comparison of  standard size units  in inches, 

millimeters  and phi units. 

.. . 

Table  Z~  Conversion table fo r  measurements  used in 

this  study to  standa rd phi units. 

' · 

10 X  10 TO THE CM. 
Kllll'l'll.. • • • • • ,.CO . 

358·t.CCI  . 
••:& .~ IJ ,  .  . ... 

.. 

::r:;:;:.. d ·· L 

·.:  · 

;t: .. :!: ;~· :  ~=: :~ t:;. 

..  . ... 

: 
,. 

CUMULATIVE 

FREQUENCY  CURVES 

...  ·._ 

·~ :: 

f 
i'  .: 

; 

: 

:: 
':··· 

:·: 
:~::' 

.. 
::: 

... 

.. 

Samples  from  the  floodplain  of  the  Colorado 
River 

r. :  .. 

: :~_:: : ·- .···.. 

; 

'  . ~' 

Number: 

. .~:: :~  ~~;.· 
:  :t :: · 

:::;:; 

... :;: 

. 

.' ,;  . 

;•:: 
.:-: 
::·.: 
·•:-:  ~.: :~

: : : 

' ; 

, .. 

... .. 
· -~ .  --

160  A 
160  B 
160  c 
161  A 
161  B 
161  c 
162 

: 

;; 

;;, 

... 
; 

I'' 
; ;  ~  ;  .~ : 

:::  ........  ';.;  -~;;::: ~  ~=~== 
·:·  ~+~ :  ~~~: ·~~~; :  >:~: 

:·'  .:.~: 

r- :•  ,:. 

· :?f : ~t~t;.;r : :::; :~ · .  · :r:  :  ··  ·  .:· 
'. 
··;::;  r ~..;  ·::: :~~-r::_~-
.- ;___  ::.: f: :::t.:  ·1':::,..:...  : ~ 
.... . . .   1·--·  :.::r:: . :· ~--- ....-
.. .. ... .. 

:;  '  '  -~--

:~ 
.~; 
·:  -:  _::t ~ : 
...'.~'  :~~-
t::-.::1. 

1-­

-- . 

.... 
....  . 

:.:_,  r::.:  . : ~ : 

......: : . ~-

·-: ··:·· 

' :· ... 
.::· 

' 

:::.: ·:=: 

.. .: :·  ;;;; 

.::>u::;:=~=..7-::=~- ·-·· ·· 

..::· . ... :... ~::~_ ·  :~. 

..  c.. 

.  ....  ·_ 

--~ ~i : ~ .  :=-·r- ---~ 

1--·· 

:.::·  :=. :.;:·. .:: __ 

.... 

-­

-··--·-­

:.. 

--·--­·--· 

""· ·· 

·;..,....  ··­

lOXI01'6'i'HI:CM. 
kiiUP'I'IU. a  1188IIR  CO . 

3"!59-14G 
111.\DIIfll" ,  l  .  A. 

·  •·--'---~· 

:1 

::r: 
.t  · ;:1 : 
·• 
.......:r  .·:. ~~ ::: :l : : : :; . :: . r 

·····r:·  . t ::·: .l  .. ~; ..•.• 
r 

.: .1 .. :~t::::.+ ··  '~'~;...:: 

r: 

·  •-- ·r--·4-~--i---- ·  ' · ·--

-­

;:::::  ...  ­

.' 

CUMULATIVE  FREQUENCY  CURVES 

'  .. ....  ·: ...,........ 

·--·  ·---­
- --· 
- ~,::.-.:.~ ....: ~-::  -:.:: ,...  ...  :- : .. ·: :·~- r-;·: : ·== 
... 
: ::-..... . 1-- ..... --

.. ....:· --

...... 

. 

,__ .,..... 

!--.- '-·--­

'  ~ --

·- · 

Samples  from Colorado  River  terraces 
Sixth Street  Terrace: 
Montopolis  Terrace: 
Capitol  Terrace: 
Delaney Terrace: 

173 
174 
179 
183 

.. .. .. ..
E::.~~~_; : 

.. . 
----
-~ 

.. 
...... 

... 

·­
:;;: 
.. 

~- · -

·- ······ 
- . : ·: 
.... 

;..:;...  ~-:= --

;:; 

f:.: 

....... 

___;.... _ 

--- ...
... 
... ··-·  --­
...  ,__  ..
..  .......;...: 
:: · 
...

' 

···­

.

::::  :__. 

.......

......

' ~-=~=: .._:_;....!::-- :-:-:-· ·­

,.-=o==·

-
-
;..~  .. · .._. 

,.... 

.... . 

:.:::::: 
....  '-'-=  . . .:-.=:1 "~- ,-
~~~  ..  ----­
··­

---

..... 

c "  .. 

--

.. • • 

·.:.111  "'·-­

-·  ...

--- --- - ~~ :'~!:::... 

-- ----

,... . 

.:·.. 

·-

: . ...:::. 

...· f~~= 

..... 
--

.. . 
..--- · · : --
...... 

": .: 

--~  : ... 

.... 

.... 
,___ 

-­

--

--,--­

....

·------

......  .... 

..... 

..... 

.:::;  ::.:- .... --­

~  ::~:.-.  ::: 

.... ~ 

G  __.  . ..-;....: 
~ 

Q) 

....> 
... 
:;ftS 
e ...,.,....IW!· 
:s 
u  --­

-

,___  ·­

....

.·:1 -- - . ...  ... ~: 

.... 

. :  . 

::::  .. 

~ '·­

,:-:--~--

.,_,_,. 

.# 

. 

--

..... 

1  ':.._·;~=-i.~ ·  ·#· ,.·.:: : 7
·

.= ---

~=----

,, , '·  :-'  --~=

-·-·---­

...

- -
.:,.. 
· 
-:;•·:-:·.:.::::

;...:;: ;.....

-::~ 

·---­

.  : ;..;..~--

·-­

..: ·'

·-·--­
f---1---­
.---­

::: 

T  ;/. 
...

• 

. 
:.: ..  ,;-..77"~~~ . 
'·:..:.l::: 

; ' 

.. 

'-­
- ~ ~---· 

.. . 
:: ·  ---- ·­
•  : ·  :-=~ ==  - .... 

; .. 

'

j 

:~: 

- ~ ::~- ' 

,;  1:  ......  ·~- -

·-­
..  .. 

-'­

---

... ....

'  .. . 

-

·­

.. 

... 
•·  ;... ...:.,;... 

.. 

. .. 

....

.•·· 

Grain Size  in Phi Units  =-'". . . ... 

,.. · 

·:-..:

·­
...... 
...,.... 

....... 
...  ;::-;­
.... . _::~~
•  -

..

tO X  10 TO THIE CM. 
ICI:I.I,.PIII. a  1:8811"' co; 

10 X  10 TO THIE  CM. 
K~IJ,.I'&.L. •  a•c&R c::o. 

358·14(1 
M.ADI· Ih u.~ &.·A;; 

~~~~i=!~~~~'4~~.],'f.!S'fX'¥lli'fY;;: 
··-·  ··--·  -- ····  ···· 

- ··-·-··  ·····t··---· 

·~--=-

· 

CUMULATIVE  FREQUENCY  CURVES 

''F''  ! 

~~~:.~ :~~~~~c"~ -:.-:~~~~~~ 

Jo;l£f;33'f';fc~i::"~:10~~:;t~:: ~~~i' ~=~~ 
:~:w.:.::  ::::::.;.:.::. == 

:::: :1:.~:  ....::..:=~..::::::.:::.:  : :.;.:~-= -

;~~;~; ~~g ~~ ;:~;~~ :~;~i~i~ ~~§i 

.;=t:::::::~ .-!:;:::.!1:-~:"" -- =:.-:---- ~,-~ ~~~==-: 
· - -

·-;J:;:=:=;~ ............  ·--=t·---

·-

· 

· 

.:._:__.  -- ::.-::::  ::t.--::.:--::·:;~--::t::··~~=-=;=: :-·::  .:-:.•:~- --~ - --::·:.:.· 

:::.:x::-.• 

•,  _____ 

···  +-~---- --- - · 

- -~= 

· -·--······· · r... .  .  ···  The  dashed line  is  a  plot of 

=:: 
§

Sample . H 163 with  the  four  ~ 
inch  to  eight  inch  grain size  ~ -
excluded. 
In the  sample 
this  grain .size  consisted of 

~ 

.  . . .  .  1 ,  •  •  . • • • • • •  

~- ~tffii±--+~r.-~ 
. . ...... ... .  ..  ..... 

~ 

~'-'  -~ 

tO X  tO TO THif CM, 
eccu~~•u. •  ceec" co. 

•••-r~(J

MAI&IIlU . I . A, 

... .  ·:-· 

·~·  ~-...  l'--~~r 

.. 

'-· 

CUMULATIVE  FREQUENCY 

CURVES 

- -· 

-

· -

1---'--­

·--·--­

·­-1-· 

·"-­ -

.. 

··- · 

---

,_ 

·-
:.... 

·­
.. 

, ;, 

--·-·· 

·­
.:  -- . 

· - f ­

·----

.•.. 

·---·--

:t  :: 
;:, 
: :!~ 
-~~--· :;±; 

: ... 
·­
••  ~rr· 
, ..:: 

Samples  from  tributaries  of the  Colorado 
River 

Number: 

168  A 
168  B 
171 
17Z 

Z4  A 
Z4 B 
54 

·---· 

A:  ......... _ 

... 

-;:~ 

___ 

:·: 

I  .. ~. 

...... a 
.. 

-~==:~  ::~·=.:  -·-·--­

.T 

. . . . . . . . . .  -

·- ,.-.;.:;::  ~. 

•  -- ---·  ~ · " 

·:·  :-::-:::  .::~  ·­

'  ;.­

... 

---

f-·-1--­

....  - :  ~·· 

-·- ___ ;,;:..__

-
·-·  r-·- "­

... 

. r~.~  ~~~ .  :~. 
r.,  _,. ,~·:.-- :~~=- -··-· ···- ..__  .... 

~:::.. · 

·  ---~~~..: ..::  .. .....-~.-

·  ·· · - - -~0' 
.# 

· - ·  ·  · -· 

' .. 

·---·­

.- ·-­

·­

....  ..

.. ----· .. ~-

.~:::
-·  ' - .... 

1-- .... ,__ 

...  I~=  =  :·:  •--i.:.:.-:-::: .::: 

· ·-
.... ' ·­

-:: ~::::!--.:-:-:  .,.. 

·:-~·:: 

-· 

.... - ... 
... ........ 

--
·--­

·-·- ... 
........ ­

..... 

Grain Size  in Phi Units  :~:  ·~·  ··· 
·r... 

-~~ 

'' 

----

..  ··--·--­
.·--

-..- -·  ...... 

... 
·-­
~::.~·  ~~=-:~ 

;.:; : ·:--·  ':·:!~·  ..:.:_"':.=::.~· 

........:·:::..--· 

::-... --~:=f.. . 

__  ;..; ...  f::-:-: . ..  ... 
·.--..-· 
:::.:.:  ' ...:.:_
:;::;::
::.-:-::: 
--:=.:•:.: 
..  ~ ' 
:• 
-:---:---:~ 
-~··-- .... ~- "-::; 

f-~ 

..:  •__ .. . 

...  ~~:.  ,___ ::::.

:·  ·---

·t:~·  •::. ;~:~r::: :  r:-- ~- .:-:::.::  :::::~g;--

­
lOX 10 TO TH. C:M. 
ICIIUI'I'IIt...  1:8811"  CO . 

~·f~C3 
•aut~ ~. •· A, 

t.::..  t:::.:r  ::~: :·;_"1  ~::·:f~-·.r:;::.:t::::: ....• --~- ..:r  .:.:r=·::.::: .. t ........ _, 

1 
..  .. _ 

1 

• 

:  ~· !· · ~-- ·-

-· 

:::  :.: 

.~· 

· •  I·-:: 

· :.: .~· 
~: r~:  -~~  ..:·.. 
...  :·:·:~  ._::-.: 
·­
.., 

·:: .~: .. ·.· 
__.. 

CUMULATIVE  FREQUENCY  CURVES 

,;.;;;, .... 

Samples from  lag  gravel 
River  drainage. 

in the  Colorado 

---

Number:  177 

56 

·-· 

~ 

......... -.  ~..:.·.::· 

::7'=::- •.  ·.:  ~- -.. ·~ 

~f:...... 
. 
:~..·  -t~- :~-~ 
·:·..

.. .: ~- ~  ... .· -~ 

~""".:  ;; ~- · 

... 
::·:·: 
·~  ·-· ..;::·: ~=~  .•  .  .. 
... - ... 

·- ··::  ::· 
. . 

.. 

•

:_-_  ..:: 
..  ..  · - 1-. 

•  ~ - . 

·-· 

:1.:  -­

..  ~ . -

··• ·..~ --·-· 

: ....  !~!': 

,.. 

__,.  ,_, 

;-..  . 
.. 
..... 

....  --: 

.. 

:" 

_; ,____ 

.___ 
·-

.... __.. 

~:;:::." - ·:. 
:· 

::7'· o:=::
··­
·" 
::..  -~:--0.~  '  :~:::·= 
=~·: :·::, 
'":_.-
.........·,__  ::·'::: .·::·..·· --· ..-·· --~-=-
,_..  .;. ~---~::_ ~-:- f-- ~=~· ;;:·~:::=: 

.... 

..... :::::1...· ,_.. 

·-·  _.....:.........~~ ~:::. 
::  ·;;_  :;=;::­
·----­

..-­

. 
I!; 

--

.·.:.-."  ...... 

~==- .... 
....  ·--­

, ..-.:. 
:·. 
... h· · · . -·· · 

·-- ­
· ·
::::.. ::.::.: .  ·'­

., ' 

.... 

' :1 

~-

·:-: 

·: .....  '  :di~~  c.::; 
::·  ·-· 
...  .. 
: :~
:; J~··: 'if~~ t'  '.. 
.·- ..  ::·~:  . 

'~:  ;~;:  :··­

;: 

.... 1··:·: 

.••·  ... _  '--· 

~~( . 
.:::-::;:;f·~. 

~.:·....  ;;. -:f  ·- •..:.· .•.
: ~: :  ··- .. :.

.. . 

·~-

·: .  .:...•  ·­

10 X  10 TO THII CM. 
K&UP'P'I£1....  11••a:111  C:O. 

358·14G 
IIAOIUI U,  I . A. 

CUMULATIVE  FREQUENCY  CURVES 

·• 
·­

·-:-·-·r­

-· 
........_. 
·- · 

. 

--­

•:·. 

1,-.  ·-­
.. ­

·­

.._.  ·--­

...... 

.... 

-

... ......... _ ~----; :::::::-.:: 

~·- . : ~7:-:::· I · • •  

......_ 

·---­ -­

.. _, ___  ·­

·-· 

- - ~ -­

-­

......  ~ - ­

.. 

___ ,_ ___ : 

_. ,.. r····  .... -:  ·-· 

-= 

-­

·--·: 

--- ·- _.. . ... 
.-· .... .. 

-~~­
,,.,. 
....... "--­

""'~ 

:::::  .. 
·~ ........... ~­
:·-· -:-:. 

r~-~ :· 

:~~- ~~:~~-J;:.  -~­

.. ··-·  .::~  ·:=  ~=­ ~;;; -:::  .:.:­

:::.  ::::.. ·::.=­
:::  .~:.­ :::::;::; 

f­

::·  :::.  ~:: 

::.;::l~-~; 

-~­ :.~~ 

:.:::::.~:::.. ~=  --.~~·-::­·  i··:·:=·:·-· ~­ -:---~·:= 
,_ ___  ....  :·. 

... ~-­

, .  . ,::~:-.·· 
,:... 

. .. . 

-

r--­

. ­ - --­
. --­
·--­
... 
,....  ·-·  --­

... 

~~­

.... 

.. 

-·· ... . 

~-- ,... 

·--­
......... 

·--· 

.... 

--· -­
....  ·­
!--· 
..  1· ·-····­
·--·  1----i=· 
· - · 

·­ 1-·­

..  ·---~  ::::~ ;: :·;·.:-: 
-r--- .. .......... !-: 
..  ;---1-­

·--·--·· 

r--:·:  ..  1--·  -· 
· :-
-- t~::-~~=~­
.. .  ~ -
' 

: ::::.t.. 

· --!---­

. : .-:  f:·::· 
~~-- ----­

,.  :: 

::·:-:-:-1 ____  ,,  - 1­

:~­
..  ,.- :· ­
.·­
. 
·-· 

· 

·­ -

·-­

.::::;.. 

... . 
1:  ·: ::. ~.; 
~~ : ... ~­ -.

...  - ~~::: f::.::: .-.:­
:..:..;:.-;-:-~-..  . 
. 

,_ 

..... 

... 
·--· .. . 

.... .. 
... 
::~·~:· 

'-;

.. 
...  ---·  ,.... 

... 

........ 

-~~~"~:­ r­

~~ r..::.:.:..  .::= 
.............  --­
,..  -·.:~---­
· :=: 

­:··:: ........:::-·::.. 
...  _ 

'th. 

:.: ' 
~-:· 

...... 

.:.::  -

.:: 

All  samples  from  the 
Asylum  Terrace fall
_wl 
.... 

lS  area. 

ln 
- ·--· · 

th. 

:::.:· '::.::. ..  := t:-:: · 

t·---+-: 

...:-·~·:__ ·_~ :~~--J-­- ~­

__ ,__ 

- ····:~;; -~~-­
, :.::.: L: · ~~  ._ ..,_. 
·..~ 

~ ~_:·+:-:=-~~~=-·'7 
·~:=_=_  All  samples  from  the 
Hornsby  Terrace fall 
within  this  area. 

- ; :  
:::_ 
~?-: 
f-t 
. .  . ~· '· '•'  -·=~ :~;~'.'-~~·coc:r::  ;,~~ ~""'c' ,, --- ~~: 
,__, ___ 

~;~'i~.~ 
· 

·:::::::::-- ----·  ... 

.  .  · . . 

·-- -­

· 

·­

·--­ ~.­::: :··· ~:: ···w·· 

:·.::-.::::;:  ,;=... , 

- ~  ~ ~W 
~ 

~-~=­

.:. ::-;·:-:::::. 00.. . 

_'·....-"""· i·· ---·.. 
~-+-~..__.., __--+­•.11

. 

· 

. 

-~: : 
.  :.-:.l~.J::~~f-: • ··--·r- •  l,---i ·:::  :·~:I-

: .~... 
··  ....  ·· : r .. -.~~ 

•• 

,., 
.....  Grain Size  in  Phi Unit1 :-::: 

:: ":;:~:;  :::::-:.. 
::..  ~-.:-·::A~~:.:. 
··--::::·:;;_ 
...- .• 
. :·:-­

·~---

· .. . :.... 
-
--= 
·- - - - · --
... 

.. 
... f'~~  ,. ·.  . 

---·-·• 

,:_:-
.....1:; 
1--­

.• :· 

·• 

1

.  : ­

::::_ l:~:.::::.:.

---..,.-· ··:...-~-:.::--·  ~:­

i::.t~ 
·:.::f:: 

l~~ 

r­ · 

.:·:  -;: • . 

•• f- -~-. 

...,... 

,r 

:·::~t·· 
'··· ·  ·-· ~=:: 

..... ··-· 

.•. 

-· -­

.... 

·-­

-

.::-.. ·::-· 

. 

·-!-·--­

~ 

60 

only ·fragment of that size.present in the  outcrop.  As  a  consequence the  sample 

was  plotted ~both ·:with , and without the .boulder ·included,  on the cumulative 

curves  (Figs.  12.and  15).  The  plot with  the boulder excluded was  within the 

-.limits  of all other samples  ~ollected frbm  the Asilum Terrace.  With the boulder 

included the ·plot fell only ·slightly outside these  limits  and was  not similar to 

I 

the  plots  of either the ·Hornsby Terrace  or the thre.e .lower terraces • 

.Delaney Terrace  Deposits 

. A single· sample ·.collected from  the ·Delaney Terrace  (see Appendix ·and 

Fig.  10)  was· deeply weathered;  the matrix and also  smaller pebbles  were com­

pletely replao.ed  by caliche.  Large  pebbles and cobbles also  showed replace­

ment and  leaching .of  the -original  material by ground  water in ·the· form  of halos 

of alteration surrounding the  pebble~.  The ·sample locality ls in .a· th.tn·layer of 

chert,  quartzite  and flint cobbles  underlying the  g·ravels  of St. ·Elmo  Bench. 

The .limited data only suggests  that the  Delaney gravel is m'uch coarser 

. th_an that of the Asylum  Terrace. 

Deposits  of Tributaries of tbe Colorado River 

Samples  168A  and  1688  were  collected from  a  high terrace of Walnut 

.  .  .. 

.  .. 

· -· 

Creek,, .exposed in a  large gravel-pit.  The  two  samples  wer~ collected approx­

imately  150  yards .apart ~ot}l nea~ the  base ·Of .the  deposit.  ~h-.ir plots ·on  the 

cumulative ·ourves  (Fig.  13)  ~re· almost identical.  The· range  in grain size,  as 

·expected,  is less than that .of  the -samples  from  the  Colorado River  with the 

maximum  size of the  cobbles .being  two  inches  (see Appendix and Fig.  13). 

The  walnut Creek deposits  are finer  grained due  to two major .factors. 

. 

' 

. 

61 

First,  Walnut Creek has · a  much  smaller discharge  and  its competence  is less 

than the  Colorado River.  Second,  the grain  size of the  rock available  for  tra~s­

port  is  much  finer  as  most  of the Walnut  Creek drainage  is  in blocky weathering 

marls ·and  chalks  of the  Upper  Cretaceous  Gulf Series. 

Samples  24A  and  24B  were  taken from  a  terrace  and  the floodplain  of a 

branch of Wilbarger Creek.  Despite  its  small  size and  the ·small discharge of 

the creek the deposits  (see  Fig.  13  and Appendix)  are coarser than those  of the 

Colorado  River.  This  is  a  result of the drainage  being in a  deposit of  lag gravel 

and  the  stream  not  having the  competence to move  the large cobbles,  except 

possibly during  extremely heavy runoff.  In this respect the  cobbles  resemble a 

lag  deposit;  despite  their pre.sence in the  stream  bed,  they have  undergone  very 

little  transport  and  grain  size  is  primarily a  function  of the  grain  size of the 

material  supplied to  the  stream. 

Samples  171  and  172  (see  Fig.  13  and Appendix)  were :taken from  the St. 

·Elmo  Bench deposits  and  the  cumulative  curves  are very  similar.  The  drainage 

of the creek that formed  the  bench  (probably Barton Creek  prior to capture)  is in 

the  Edwards  Plateau and  consequently the  material  available  to  the stream is  · 

coarser than that available  to Walnut  Creek but not as  coarse  as  the  reworked 

lag gravels  of  sample.s  24A  and  24B. 

Sample  54  (see  Fig.  13)  is  from  a  minor terrace  of Gilleland Creek.  As 

its  drainage  i$  very restricted and  entirely within the  Upper Cretaceous  section 

beyond the  limits  of the  lag <Jravels  it is  a  fine  9rained sample. 

In  summation, :the  tributaries  of the  Colorado River exhibit grain size 

62 

properties  that ~re,  in part,  a  reflection of the  size of material available  for 

transport.  The :coarsest grained deposits  are from  the  smallest creek while 

deposits  of the  larger creeks vary in their grain  size distribution.  As  the_down­

stream deposits  of Wilbarger  Cr~ek are finer..  grained than samples. 24A  and  24B 

it is ·apparent that the  C()arse  cobbles  are _not readily moved  by the  stream.  They 

are .probably abraded by other particles ·moving  in the ·stream bed  and  are  not 

transported until they have  been abraded to a  size within the  competence ·Of  the 

stream. 

Conclusions 

Grain size distributions ·of the  samples  indicate ·the  following: 

1.  In the tributary  streams  the  grain size distribution ia. dependent in 

part on the material .available .to  the  stream and  the  competence  of 

the  stream. 

2.  Grain  size distributions ·cannot be used apart from  other data  to 

distinguish terraces  of tributary  strea~s from  terraces  of the 

Colorado River. 

3 0  The  uniformity of  size of the Asylum  Terrace  gravel  and the  Hornsby 

Terrace  gravel  reflects  the  steady state regimen of a  stream  at Q"rade. 

·Wher~ ·major tributaries ·enter the  main  stream and  their bedload 

mingles  with the  channel  gravel  of the  main stream,  steady  state 

conditions  do  not  exist and exceptions  to  the ·uniformity of the  chan­

,  nel gravel occur.  · Uniformity of  size of channel  gravel also varies 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

-downstream a.s  a  function of abrasion in the  stream. 

63 

4.  The  :a;ornsby ·and Asylum  Terraces  were  mapped  and  correlated on 

the basis of altitude.  Since the  grain size cUstri.bution of each of 

these · .terraces. is  distinctive  it is ·possible that  grain size distribu­

tions ·can be ·u·sed . to correlate  terrc;1oe . remnants • 

5.  Finally 1  analysis  of  grain 'size distribution cannot be  used to deter­

· mine  whet~e~ a  give~.- depo$it is either an overbank deposit) a .channel 

gravel  or a  flood  chan.nel.  deposit.  This  must be . determined  by 

I 

' 

• •' 

~areful .f~eld work  prior  to  samplin.g.  As  indicated by  grai~ size 

plots 1  apparent overbank .deposits· of the  present floodplain· ·are 

'' 

' 

...., 

. 

-

·coarser than channel  gravels  .of the Asyll.fm  and Hornsby Terraces. 

' 

' 

~ITHOL0QIO ANALYSIS· AND  WEATHERING  CHARACTERISTICS: 
SUMMARYOF  RESULTS 

Following the methods .described earlier the  weight  percent of  silica, 

plutonic rock fragments,  and  limestone  rock fragments  was  determined for  each 

·sample.  Th~s~ weight  percents  were  then plotted on triangular graphs  (Figs.  16 

and 17)  with  each of the  above  rock types  representing one  endpoint.  If the 

sum  total of the  weight  percents  of these  three  rock types  equalled  100%  for a 

sample  the  data  would  plot  ~s a  point, _but meta~orphic rock  fragments ,  clastic 

rocks,  mud  balls -and  unidentifiable objects compose  part of almost every 

sample.  Consequently the ·plot of any  sample  consists of three  lines intersect­

ing to form  an equilateral triangle.  The  distance  across  the  triangle can be read 

in terms  of percent and this · number indicates  the  weight percent of rock types 

other than. silica,  plutonic rock fragments  and  limestone  present in the  sample _ 

(see Figs.  16 -and  17).  Samples  168A,  1688,  and  54  were  e~ch approximately 

· 7 - 13%  foss-ils  and fragments  of fossils.  As  the  fossils  are  composed of CaC03 

they were  lumped  with the limestone  because of their similar weathering and 

abrasional  pro~ertie s . 

Floodplain  Deposits  ofthe Colorado  River 

All  samples  from  the  Colorado  floodplain  (see  Fig.  17)  included more 

than 65%  limestone  except for  160C  which  contained  51%  limestone.  This  latter 

sample  is -anomalous  as  it contains  a  disproportionate  amount of  unidentifiable 

and  miscellaneous -rock 'types.  All  samples  contain a  fraction of plutonic  rock, 

never more  than  5% .  The  plots  of the  samples  from  the  floodplain do  not overlap-

I 

with  plots  of  the  samples  from  the Asylum  and Hornsby Terraces,  but are  almost 

64 

identical  with  th:~:· .Plots of  s~mples from  Montopolis  and  Capitol Terraces ..  There 

is  no  significant, difference  in lithology between the  samples  from  the  overbank 

deposits ·and  the ·.sample , from  the  channel gravelo 

65 

. Sixth .Street,

. . 

. 

Montopolis,  and  Capitol Terrace  Deposits

With only one  sample  from  each terrace  it is  probably not  poss~ble to 

accurately characterize the  ove~alllithology of these  terrac~s.  Samples  from 

the  Capitol and  Montopolis  Terraces  are  almost identical in lithology and  are 

similar to  the  lithology of the  Floodplain deposits.  The  one  sample  from  the 

Sixth Street Terrace  contains  no  limestone clasts  and  is  therefore  dissimilar to 

the  Capitol I  Montopolis and Floodplain deposits.  Its  lithology ·is more  similar 

to the Hornsby and Asylum  Terraces. 

Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 

The Hornsby Terrace  gravel displays  several  prominent lithologic feat­

ures.  Firs.~  . with  the  exception of  sample  164  all  samples  contain less than

1 

3%  limestone.  Se_cond 1  with the  exception of  135  the  samples  contain more 

than  10%  plutonic  rock fragments 1  a  greater percentage  than any other terrace 

deposit.  Third,  all  samples,  e:x:cept  164,  contain greater than 65%  silica .. 

Except for  164 I  all  samples  plot  within a  restricted area  on the  tri­

angular graph  (Fig.  17)  which  is distinctive  for  the  Hornsby Terrace  gravel. 

Sample  164  co:o.tains  a  disproportionate  amount of  limestone,  64%, 

which is  61%  more  than any other  sample  from  the ·same  terrace.  This  is  pos­

sibly the  result of  post-depositional reworking by tributaries,  of the  upper  part 

of the deposit. .  There  are  indications  of this  in the  outcrop  with  its anomalous 

66 

development .of layert of caliche  (see ·Appendix) . 

A second possibility is that at the time  of the  deposition of the Hornsby 

gravel the area  near sample  location  164  was  at the  mouth  of a  large  tributary 

(ancestral Walnut Creek).  If this  is the  case,  then the  high  proportion of lime­

~tone would be  an addition from  the  bedload of the  side  stream  into the  gravel 

of the main  stream  near the  juncture.  After the  introduction. of the  gravel from 

Walnut Creek the Colorado River did  not rework  this area of the  floodplain  suf­

ficiently to distribute  the  limestone fraction proportionately over the  floodplain. 

Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 

The  samples from  the Asylum  gravel  (except  163)  are very similar inlith­

ology to those of the Hornsby gravel.  They are  all greater than  75%  silica,  less 

than 6%  limestone,  and greater than  5%  plutonic rock fragments.  All  of these 

samples  plot in a  small area on the .graph .(Fig.  17)  which overlaps  with the 

plots  of the Hornsby Terrace • 

Sample  163  (as  with  sample  164  from  the Hornsby Terrace)  is  in the 

vicinity ·of  the  merging of ancestral Walnut Creek  with  the floodplain of the 

ancestral  Colorado  (see  P~ate I  for  location of  163  and  164).  The  incorporation 

of a  large quantity of limestone  into the ·floodplain deposits  of the. Colorado  at 

the mouth of a  tributary would  account for the  unusually high  proportion of 

limestone  in sample  163  (see .Appendix ·and  Fig.  16). 

Delaney Terrace  Deposits 

The  one  sample contains  a  high .percentage of silica  (91%) ,  a  few frag­

ments  of  plutonic rock,  and  7%  limestone.  This  deposit is deeply weathered 

67 

which  is  possibly the  reason for  the  scarcity of the  plutonic rock  fragments.  The 

sample  contains  crystalline  quartz  which  along  with  the  plutonic rock  fragments 

ide~tifies it as  a  deposit  of thE?  Colorado River  distinct from  St.  Elmo  Bench. 

Manor Lag  Gravel 

Samples  56  and  177  are  from  well exposed  lag  gravel.  Sample  56  is in 

an area  where  the  tributary  streams  contain a  high  percentage  of limestone 

pebbles o  The  sample  is  71%  limestone  cobbles  which indicates  an origin dis­

tinct from  other  lag  gravel  in the Austin area.  It is  probable  that the  deposit 

is  a  remnant  of  a  tributary  stream  terrace  which had  incorporated into  it a  high 

percentage  of chert and quartzite  cobbles  from  Colorado  River  terraces.  Grain 

size  analysis  of  sample  56  (Fig.  14)  indicates  the  coarser-mode  of the  sample 

is  itself bimodal.  The  bimodal  nature  of the  sample  in its  grain  size distribu­

tion is  paralleled by differing  lithologies  for  the  modes.  The  coarser half of the 

sample  is  composed of 2 5-3 5%  quartz I  chert I  flint I  etc.  while  the  finer  grained 

part of  the  sample  is  91%  limestone  and  only 3%  quartz _.  This  seems  to  be 

indicative  of  the  mixing of two  stream  deposits;  one  a  finer  grained  gravel  of  a 

tributary  stream  with  a  high  percentage  of limestone I  the  other a  coarser grain­

ed Colorado  River  gravel  with  a  high  percentage of  silica. 

Sample  177  is  from  a  high  lag  gravel  near Bastrop.  The  sample  is  99% 

silica with  a  fraction  of  a  percent of  plutonic rock.  This is typical  of  most of 

the  outcrops  of Manor  lag  gravels  which are  collections  of cobbles ·and  pebbles 

of chert and  quartz. 

NCI.  :\•In  · TC  OIIIITklllliN  O"A"H  """'E" 
f"IANOULA"  CO • O"DINATI 

WALNUT  CREEK  & TRIBUTARIES 

PLUTONIC 

ST.  ELMO  BENCH 

LAG  GRAVEL 

FLOODPLAIN 

SIXTH  STREET 

MONTOPOLIS 

CAPITOL 

HORNSBY 

ASYLUM 

DELANEY 

LITHOLOGY  OF  SAMPLES

Weight percent of  each  of  the  three 
major  rock types  found  in the  pebbles 
larger  than  one  half  inch  in diameter. 

Width  of  the  triangle 
indicates  the  weight 
percent of  the  mis­
cellaneous  rock  types.

...... 
Cj)

TOTAL SILICIA 
(CHERT,  FLINT, 

QUARTZ,  ETC.  ) 

D 

---
-----

LIMESTONE 
(CARBONATES) 

NO.  340 -TC  DII:TZDI:N  DIIA..H  """1:11 
TIIIANDULAII  CD·DIIDINATit 

c 

PLUTONIC 

LITHOLOGY  OF  TERRACE  GRAVELS 

Plot of all  1ample1 from 
the  Horn1by  Terrace 
(  sample  164 plots  out 
of this 

rouping  ) 

TOTAL  SILICA 

.  LIMESTONE 
(  CARBONATES  ·, 

,(...--.........,..~-·--X-<-·1-·v__,.._._.,.'"*-..,.,........"*' 

70 

Deposits  of Tributaries  to  the  Colorado River 

Samples  of  gravels  from  St.  Elmo  Bench,  Walnut  Creek and Gilleland 

Creek all  plot in an elongated area  near the· limestone  end of the  graph  (Fig.  17). 

All  samples  have  less than four  percent plutonic rock fragments .and  greater than 

65%  limestone.  The  samples  from  the  St.  Elmo  gravel contain more  chert than 

the  samples  from  the  Walnut Creek  gravel,  but contain less than one  half of 

one  percent of  plutonic rock fragments. 

The  stream  which formed  St.  Elmo  Bench  traversed  part of the  Edwards 

Plateau and  a  high  percentage· of chert would be  normal  as  would  a  lack of 

plutonic rock  fragments.  The  few plutonic rock fragments  present in the  gravel 

are  possibly derived from  reworking  of the  Delaney Terrace  deposits  which St. 

Elmo  Bench truncates. 

The  drainage  of Walnut  Creek  is  largely in the  Upper Cretaceous lime­

stones  of the  Gulf Series  and consequently its  deposits  consist mostly of  lime­

stone  pebbles,  however,  the  drainage  basin includes  extensive  deposits  of the 

Manor  lag  gravel  and  the  remnants  of other terrace  gravels;  most  of the  chert, 

quartz  and  plutonic  pebbles  are  from  these  deposits. 

Sample  54,  from  Gilleland  Creek,  was  collected west of,  and higher in 

elevation than,  the  western limit of the  Manor lag gravel.  Its  drainage  is re­

stricted to  the  limestones  of the  Upper Cretaceous Austin Group,  and as would 

be  expected,  the  deposits  are  100%  limestone.  No  traces  of chert,  plutonic, 

metamorphic  or other rock  types  are  present in the  sample. 

Samples  24A  and  24B  are  96%  and  100%  silica respectively.  Being 

directly derived  from  the  Manor lag gravel 1  they plot identical to  sample  177  from 

the  gravel  near Bastrop.  The  stream from  which these  samples  were  collected 

is too  small  to  have  effectively · reworked  the  coarse  chert and  quartz  cobbles  so 

they are  actually representative .of the  lithology of the  lag gravel and  not  the 

71 

lithology of a  minor tributary..  to  the  Colorado River. 

Weathering of Alluvial  Deposits 
General  Statement 

In conjunction with  the  sampling I  systematic observations  were .record­

ed on the  development of  soils I  the  general  weathering  of the  terrace  gravel 

and  the ·development of caliche.  This  data  was  recorded in an attempt to find 

either systematic relationships  between terraces  of different  ages ·or to  find 

characteristics  unique .to  one  or more  terrace. 

The  development of  soil  profiles  is dependent on a  number of variables 

which could  not be determined  for  the  areas  examined.  First I  soil development 

is  affected by the  amount of recent .erosion on the  tecrace.  Even if only at long 

intervals  erosional  lowering of the  surface  strips  off  part of the  soil zone .and 

thereby starts  anew the  development  of the  soil  profile.  Second I  the  deposition 

of  slope  wash or other detrital materials  on the ·surface  of the  floodplain also 

starts  anew the  development of the  s:oil  profile.  This  process 1  operating by it­

self I  is easily recognized  bu~ a  combination -of -deposition alternating with 

erosion can affect drastically the  development of the  soil  profile.  Third 1  the 

nature  of  the  material  deposited on the  terrace  or floodplain affects  the  soil 

profile.  The  depo:sition of. marl  or CaC03  rich material  on a  section of  siliceous 

gravels  provides material for the  rapid development  of a  B horizon rich in 

72 

CaC03 •  Fourth 1  observations  were often taken in gravel  pits  or in ~carps which 

were  poorly exposed or altered by construction and earth moving  operations. 

Asylum  Terrace  Deposits 

Most quartzite  cobbles  appear almost  unweathered.  Some  cobbles I  in 

cross  section,  exhibit a  zone  1/32  inch thick of  slight concentration of man­

ganese  dioxide. 

Chert cobbles  and  pebbles  were  also  generally unaltered.  Some  cobbles 1 

however,  showed  zones  up  to  1/4 inch thick of leaching.  This  rind  is more 

commonly  1/16 to  1/8 inches thick and consists  of  a  zone  of white  porous  chert 

on the  outside of the  cobbles.  Usually at the  inside  edge  of the  zone  of leach­

ing is  a  thin zone  of darker colored concentration of  silica I  Fe203  and  probably 

Mn02.  These  zones  did  not contain CaC03.  In  sample  98  where  there  is marly 

slope  wash overlying  the  deposit,  all  pebbles  have  a  thin coat of white,  earthy 

caliche.  In sample  163  which has  a  high percentage  of limestone,  all cobbles 

and  pebbles  have thick coats of caliche chiefly on the  bottom. 

In all samples  plutonic rocks  were  weathered more  than either the  chert 

or the  quartzite.  The · amount of weathering is  directly related to  the  amount of 

mafic  minerals  in the  rock.  The  same  is true  for  metamorphic  rocks  which con­

tain mafic minerals.  Slates  and quartzites  are  affected only  slightly by weath­

ering. 

In two  samples  (98  and  163)  which contained  limestone  pebbles the 

following  features  were  observed.  The  dense more  resistant Lower  Cretaceous 

limestones  show rinds  of leaching of  CaC03  1/32  to  1/8 inches  thick.  These 

73 

pebbles 1  which  are  within  six feet  of the  surface  of the  ground 1  have  a  portion 

of the  CaC03  leached from  the  outer layer leaving a  rind  which  is  soft and 

porous  and composed  of impure  calcite 1  clay and  possibly dolomite. 

Pebbles  of the  marly I  chalky I  and  poorly resistant Upper Cretaceous 

limestones  showed  zones  of  weathering ranging  from  1/32  inches  to  several 

inches  thick.  Generally the  marl  pebbles  are  deeply weathered  and  consist of 

a  marl  core  surrounded by a  halo  of clay and  fine  grained  CaC03 .  Some  marl 

pebbles  are  weathered  completely through  with  the entire  pebble  altered frqm  its 

original marl  or chalk to  a  porous  clayey matrix,  containing only a  minor amount 

of CaC03.  Sample  163  contains  marl  pebbles  showing  all degrees  of weather._ 

ing;  and roughly  spherical nodules  of caliche-rich clay are  thought  to  be  the 

remnants  of complete  we9thering of marl  pebbles. 

Hornsby Terrace  Deposits 

Quartzite  pebbles ·are  unweathered.  Chert pebbles  in general  are  also 

unweathered,  but a  few have  leached  zones  1/3 2  inches  thick on concave  areas 

of the  surface  of the  cobble;  these  rinds  were  probably formed  in a  previou-s 

weathering cycle  prior to  deposition.  During  transport,  the  weathering  rind 

was  removed  by abrasion except on the  concave  areas. 

Plutonic  and metamorphic  pebbles  and  cobbles  are  unweathered  except 

for  thin zones  of  staining  The  staining. appears  to  be  a  combination of Fe203

o 

and  Mn02. 

Sample  164  is  the only  sample  which contains  limestone  pebbles  and 

cobbles.  Weathering  rinds ·on chert cobbles  are  1/32  to  1/16  inches thick, 

'74 

while  rinds  on plutonic cobbles  are  up to  1/8 inches  thick.  The  nature  of the 

weathering is ·s·imilar  to  that described for  the Asylum  Terrace  Gravel.  Lime­

stone  pebbles  show leached  zones  up  to 1/8 inche:s  thick  which  are  largely a 

layer of  porous  caliche·and  clay.  All  pebbles  at this ·sample  location have 

coatings  of caliche. 

Capitol  Montopolis 1  and Sixth Street Terrace  Deposits

1 

Sample  179  (see Appendix)  was  collected from  the  Capitol Terrace 

gravel  in a  high bluff  near Airport Blvd  (see  Plate  I).  The  bluff is ·approximate­

ly  55  feet  high  at this  point,  exposing a  thick  section of the  terrace  deposits. 

The  sample  is  65%  limestone  pebbles.  Chert,  quartz  and  plutonic  pebbles show 

very little weathering,  although  some  pebbles  have  zones  of leaching  1/16 

inches thick;  these  zones .are spotty and  irregular in thickness.  Limestone 

pebbles  have  zones  of leaching  1/16 to  1/32  inches  thick.  The  CaC03  leach­

ed from  these  pebbles  (and  also from  the  slope  wash on the  upper  surface  of 

the .terrace)  has  cemented the  sandy matrix of these deposits  with a  thin film  of 

crystalline  caco3 .  The  ,GaC03  is  no~ massive  fine  grained  white  caliche but 

grey translucent calcite.  All  pebbles $how a  very thin film  of  CaC03,  (see 

Figs.  4  and  5)  but  limestone  pebbles  show rinds · of  CaC03  much  thicker than 

other rock types..  Cobbles  and  pebbles  (most  commonly limestone)  have devel­

oped on their lower  surface a  mass of CaC03  cemented  sand,  gravel  and 

pebbles  (see  Figs.  3  and  4).  The  cementation is extreme,  the  strongest of any 

of the  terrace  deposits.  Caliche  is  present in thin layers  on some  pebbles  but 

calcite is more  common. 

75 

The  Montopolis  Terrace  gravel is  similar to the  Capitol Terrace  gravel in 

its  weathering features;  it has a  similar lithologic composition and the  matrix of 

the  deposit is ·cemented by CaC03.  The  lower  surfaces  of the  pebbles  show 

either crusts  of caliche or layers  of cemented  sand,  gravel,  and  pebbles.  Lime­

stone  pebbles  are  the  only rock type  to  have  weathering rinds. 

The  single  sample  collected from  the  Sixth Street gravel is composed of 

siliceous  gravel  Quartz  and chert show no  indication of weathering other than

o 

a  thin discontinuous  zone  present on a  few  pebbles.  Some  plutonic cobbles 

show intense  weathering  with the  pebbles being crumbly and  granular.  The  few 

pebbles  that are  deeply weathered contain high  percentages of mafic minerals. 

There  are  no· limestone  pebbles  in the  sample or the  outcrop and there  is no de­

velopment of caliche or crystalline  Caco3  in the  gravel.  The  Sixth Street de­

posits  are  exposed only at this  locality and  in one  area  west of Austin .where 

the  deposits  contain numerous  limestone  pebbles. 

Floodplain Deposits 

Samples  of deposits  of the  floodplain of the  Colorado have  obviously 

been s·ubjected to  the  least  "in place"  weathering of any of the  samples. 

Siliceous  pebbles  show no effects of in place  weathering but there  is a  devel­

opment of thin discontinuous  weathering rinds, ·apparently developed during a 

previous  weathering. cycle  which were  partly abraded during  transport. 

Limestone  pebbles  show a  variation in weathering rinds  of leaching  up 

to  1/4 inches thick.o  In general,  the limestone  pebbles  have  a  leached rind 

1/32  inches  thick and  a  thin film  of CaC03  developed on their lower  surfaces. 

76 

Other rock types  do .not  exhibit this. feature . 

Deposits  of  Tributaries  to the  Colorado -Riv·er  and  Manor Lag  Gravel 

The  depos-its  of St.  Elmo  Benqh  are .dominantly  limestone  pebbles·which 

show rinds  of leaching  1/16 to  1/32  inches  thick.  All  pebbles·are coated by 

layers  of caliche,  some  up to  1/16  inche-s  thick.  Limestone  pebbles  have 

thicker coats  of caliche  than chert pebbles· and  cementation of  sand I  gravel  and 

small  pebbles  to  the lower  surfaces  of cobbles  is  common. 

Walnut  Creek deposits  show features ·similar to  those .pres·ent in the  St. 

Elmo  Bench deposits.  Leaching  of  pebbles  is  less  intense I  but the development 

of caliche ;is  .similar •.  All  pebbles  in -the  higher terraces  are  coated with films 

of caliche ·up  to  1/16  inche·s thick.  The  matrix ot  the deposits  shows  a  con­

centration of caliche ·and clay minerals;  and .s.and,  gravel  and  pebbles ace 

cemented  to  the  lower  surfaces  of cobbles ·and pebbles. 

Samples· 56 I  24A  and  24B  are .all  from  lag grave! .develo.ped  in the  area 

of tpe  outcrop of the  Taylor Marl.  Weathering. of chert cobbles  1~ great with all 

cobbles  showing rinds  1/32  to  1/4 inches  thick.  The  leaching is  like· that de­

scribed for the :Asylum  Terrace  deposits  with .a  concentration of dark minerals 

inside  the  white  leached  porous· zone.  The· surface ,of  the  pebbles  are covered 

with films  of caliche  and  cl~y minerals  up  to 1/3 2 inches  thick. 

Samples  24A  and  24B  are from  lag .gravel .developed  in a  dark  bl~ck waxey 

soil of the  Taylor Marl and  show less development  of caliche than .sa:mpJ.e  56 

which is from  a  deposit  partly composed  of limestone  cobbles.  A great amount 

of the  CaC03  in the depos-it  at ·sample  location  56  is  probably derived from  the 

cobbles. 

77 

Sample  177,  from  near Bcastrop,  shows  less  weathering than the  other 

samples  of lag .gravel.  Weathering rinds  are  common on the  chert and quartzite 

cobbles,  usually  1/32  to  1/.16  inches  thick.  The  rinds  are  the  result of leaching 

of the  outer  portion of the  pebble  leaving a  halo of white,  porous I  -spongy chert. 

There)s  no  develo_pment of caliche or other Caco3  in the deposit. 

Conclusions 

Based on the  data  summarized above,  the  following  conclusions  oan be 

tentatively drawn. 

1.  Although  based on limited  sampling 1  the  Hornsby and Asylum  Terrace 

gravels,  and also the  Delaney Terrace  gravel,  show a  very low per­

centage  of limestone,  with  the exception of two  samples  probably 

contaminated by mixture  with .deposits  from  Walnut Creek.  The low 

percentage  of limestone I  less than  6%,  may be  distinctive of these 

terraces  and can possibly be  used as an aid in correlation. 

The  reason for the  low percentage of  limestone I  is a  problem  of spec­

ial interest,  as  younger terrace  gravels  and the  present deposits. of 

the  Colorado River contain about  63%  limestone  clasts.  As  large 

quantities  of limestone  are  presently available  to  the  Colorado River 

the  implication is that during  the  formation of the-Asylum  and Hornsby 

Terrace  gravels the  lithology of the  Colorado River drainage  basin 

differed  significantly from  its  present lithology.  The  Lower Creta­

ceous  limestone presently exposed in the  Edwards  Plateau between 

the  Central  Mineral Region  and Austin probably had a  much  smaller 

78 

area of exposure than at present o 

There .are  three  possible  explanations:  - First,  the  Upper Cretaceous 

Gulf  Series had  not yet been widely. stripped off  of the  Lower Cret­

aceous  Comanche  Series  in the Plateau region .so that Gulf  Series 

marls  and chalks  were  the  major rock  types  shed into the  river.  Plu­

tonics  and metamorphics  of the  Central  Mineral Region,  and cherts 

from  Lower Cretaceous  limestones  west of the  Central Mineral  Reg­

ion would  make  up the  remainder of the  rock types  available  to the 

stream.  The  lime stone  from  the  Lower  Cretaceous  west of the  Central 

Mineral  Region would  probably have  been completely destroyed by 

abrasion between the  source  and Austin,  which  is approximately  150 

miles.  Paleozoic  limestones  exposed in the  Central Mineral Region 

would  also have  been largely destroyed before they reached Austin. 

In their connection Sneed and  Folk  (1958,  pps.  115,  116  and  126) 

point out that approximately  100 to  120 miles  downstream  from  the 

last outcrop of limestone,  in the  present channel of the  Colorado 

River,  the  limestone  has  been almost completely destroyed.  As  the 

Colorado River  was  already entrenched into the  Lower  Cretaceous 

limestones  east of the  Central Mineral  Region  at the  time  of the form­

ation of the Asylum  and Hornsby Terraces,  a  small  portion of Lower 

Cretaceous  limestone  would be  introduced  into the  Colorado River 

from  exposures: along entrenched  streams.  This  contribution was  less 

than  5%  of the  total  load carried by the  river near Austin.  The  ab­

79 

sence of Upper Cretaceous  chalks  and  marls  in the deposits  of the 

Asylum  and Hornsby Terraces  indicates  that these  rock  types  were 

eliminated by abrasion very quickly and completely in the  bed of the 

river. 

Second,  an extensive  deposit of fluvial  gravel,  possibly  similar to 

the Ogallala Formation may  have  covered all of central Texas o  This 

would  effectively blanket the  outcrops  and  allow the  development  of 

a  series  of terraces  with.a  low limestone  content.  As  this blanket of 

gravel  would  also  have  covered the  Central Mineral Region there 

would  also be  a  corresponding. lack of  plutonic rock fragments..  The 

opposite  is  true,  as  the  Hornsby and Asylum  Terrace  gravels  contain 

high  percentages  of  plutonic  rock  fragments.  There  is  also  no  field 

evidence,  in the  Colorado River  drainage,  of  former  exten~ive de­

posits of fluvial  gravel covering the  Edwards  Plateau. 

A  third  explanation for  the  low percentage  of  limestone  pebbles  in 

the  deposits  of the Asylum  and Hornsby  gravels  is the  complete ·de­

struction,  in place,  of the  limestone  pebbles  by  weathering.  This 

explanation.is  unacceptable  as the  weathering  in these  terrace  grav­

els is not extreme.  While  there  is  evidence  of movement  of  CaC03 

in  some  places,  there  is  no  evidence  of extensive  destruction of 

pebbles  by solution in place.  The  writer feels  the  most logical ex­

planation of the  low percentage  of limestone  pebbles  in the  Hornsby 

and Asylum  Terraces  is the  first o 

2.  To  understand completely the  significance  of  the  lithology of the 

80 

terraces  and to be .able  to  use . lithology in correlation,  the  following 

must be  considered.  The  percentage  of rock types  in each deposit 

will vary with  the  distance  of transport  (essentially the  amount .of 

abrasion to  which  the  load  of  the  stream  is  subjected).  Consequent­

ly  samples  must be collected which  will be  representative of the  en­

tire course of the  river.  The  lithology must then be  plotted on the 

long  profile  of the  stream to  see  how it varies  with  distance  of trans­

port.  Not enough  samples  were  collected by the  writer over a  long 

enough length of river to  determine  this  for  the  floodplain  or  any of 

the  terraces  in the Austin area.  (see Sneed  and  Folk,  1958,  pp.  125 

and  126  for  a  complete discussion.) 

3.  Weathering is  of  little  use  in determining  the  age  of the  terrace  or 

in correlation of terraces  in the  Colorado  River drainage.  As  an ex­

ample  the  Capitol Terrace  gravel  (sample  179,  see Appendix)  shows 

greater weathering and  appears  older than outcrops  of the Asylum 

Terrace  gravel  (samples  165,  166 Appendix)  and also  sample  177 from 

the  Manor lag  gravel.  This is because  of the  great number of var­

iables  affecting the  weathering.  Some  of these  are. 

A.  Age  of the  terrace.  Older terraces  should  in general,  show great­

er degrees  of  weathering. 

B.  Lithologic  composition of the  deposit  Terraces  composed of

e 

limestone  pebbles  have  within them  CaC03  which  can be  leached 

81 

from  the  pebbles  by  g-roundwater  and be  redeposited  in the  gravel 

as  calcite cement or caliche. 

·C.  Rock  type  of the  slope  wash deposited  on the  upper  surface  of  the 

terrace.  As  in B,  slope  wash  of  marl  or  other CaC03  rich  rocks 

deposited on top  of terrace  gravel  introduces  CaC03  into  the  per­

colating groundwater  Consequently,  weathering,  development of

0 

caliche,  and cementation of the  gravel  will  be  more  intense. 

D. More  extensive  movement  of  groundwater intensifies the  amount of 

weathering as there is more chance for the transfer of soluble  minerals. 

Eo  Groundwater movement  is  affected  by  permeability,  degree  of dis­

section,  height of the  scarps  of terraces.  The  greater the  area  of 

the  terrace the  less  is  the  effect of  groundwater movement  as  all 

movement  except in the  basal  portion of the  gravel  is vertical. 

Greater dissection and  high  scarps  allow more  horizontal  movement 

of  groundwater through the  terrace  and  greater distribution of  sol­

uble  minerals. 

4.  The  development  of  caliche in the  terrace  gravels  of the  Colorado  River 

drainage  is  dependent on the  same  variables  as  the  weathering in the 

terraces.  This  would be  expected as caliche is a  weathering  phen­

omena.  Consequently,  caliche development  is  non-systematic  and  is 

of  little  use  in determining  the  age  of  the  terraces.  Caliche  forms only 

in terraces  where  there  is  an immediate  supply of Caco3  either in the 

pebbles  of  the  deposit  or in the overlying. detritus  and  slope  wash. 

SUMMATION 

Since  probably early Pleistocene time  the  Colorado River has  been .incis­

ing into the resistant limestones of the  Edwards  Plateau and  the less resistant 

.chalks 1  marls  and clastic rocks  of the  Coastal Plain.  In the  Coastal Plain the 

river has  formed  a  series of river terraces  and  associated deposits ·which indi­

cate a  number of periods  of graded or near graded conditions followed  by periods 

of downcutting.  The  relationship of these  periods  of grade  and downcutting to 

Pleistocene changes in climate  and eustatic .fluctuations  of  sea level it is not 

possible to tell because of the  limited areal extent of the  study.  The  geologic 

history of the area is roughly as follows • 

Central  Texas  at  the  beginning of Pleistocene  time  was  a  region of ma­

turity or early old age.  At  present the  erosional portion of the Coastal Plain 

could be considered as a  peneplain.  As  the  deltaic coastal plain .was  being ex­

tended gulfward  periods  of downcutting in the  headward regions  were  probably 

associated with climatic fluctuations I  changes in sea level and/or tilting  up­

lift.  There  was  apparently no movement on the  Balcone  Fault System.  There  is 

a  possibility of very gentle warping on the  Luling-Mexia  Fault Zone  or possibly 

widespread regional depression of the Gulf of Mexico. 

The  oldest deposits of the  Colorado are represented by the  Manor lag 

gravel and the  Delaney Terrace  gravel.  As  these deposits  are  widespread  and 

coarse  they indicate a  period of strong transporting  power.  At  this  time  the 

Edwards  Plateau was  still mostly covered by the  Upper Cretaceous  Gulf Series; 

only a  very minor amount of the  Comanche Series  was  available  to  the river. 

82 

83 

A second  period of grade  is represented by the Asylum  Terrace  gravel 

also·widespread,  though  not as  coarse as the  Delaney Terrace  gravel  and  Manor 

lag grave-l.... The  competence  of the  Colorado may  have  been· less but the· lithology 

of the drainage  basin was  not  significantly different from  Delaney Terrace .time. 

The  thinness and relatively fine  grain  size  of the  Hornsby Terrace  gravel 

suggests  a  period  of lower discharge  and competence  possibly corresponding 

with a  period of relative aridity.  Up  through  the  development of the  Hornsby 

Terrace the lithology of the  Colorado drainage  basin was  not  significantly chang­

ed.  Very  little limestone  of  the  Comanche  Series  was  incorporated into  the 

stream  deposits  and  the  deposits  were  largely chert,  flint  and  also.plutonic 

clasts .derived from  the  Central  Mineral Region. 

The  gravel of the  Capitol Terrace  is exceedingly coarse  and composed of 

67%  limestone  clasts.  The  gravel is thick and the  Colorado  probably had a  high 

discharge ·and competence  in comparison to  the  river  which formed  the Asylum 

and Hornsby Terrace .gravels.  The  lithology of the  drainage  basin had been 

altered in that the  Upper  Cretaceous  Gulf Series  had been almost completely 

stripped off of the· Comanche Series in the · Edwards  Plateau. 

The  younger Montopolis  Terrace  gravel  is  almost identical in grain  size, 

distribution,  lithology and  thickness  with the  Capitol Terrace  gravel.  The  sim­

ilarities of the  two  terrace deposits  and  their areal distribution suggest that the 

Montopolis  and  Capitol Terrace  gravels  are  of the  same  genetic  episode  in the 

history of the  Colorado River.  The  writer feels  that the  origin of these two 

terraces. is  probably identical to  that of the  degradational  stream deposits  of 

84 

Stricklin  (1961)  in that they were  formed  by a  stream  which  was  contempor­

aneously downcutting  and eng.aged  in lateral  planation. 

The  Sixth Street Terrace  gravel is another coarse thick  section of  stream 

deposits  similar to  those  of the  Capitol  and  Montopolis  Terrace  gravels,  form­

ed during  a  separate 1  relatively  short period of  grade~ 

4-

The  youngest deposits  of the  Colorado  River  are  those  of the  floodplain 

. and  channel and  were  developed  with  the  Colorado  at an extended  period  of 

grade.  The  floodplain  deposit  is  thick and  the  channel  gravel  coarse.  The 

present  Colorado  apparently has  as much  or more  discharge  and  competence, 

as  based on  grain  size of the  deposits 1  than at any other period  of  terrace 

formation  in the  Pleistocene. 

The  surface  of  the  floodplain  is  scarred and  terraced by scour routes 1 

meander cut offs I  etc  but these  are  minor features  normal  to  a  floodplain  and

o 

are  not  indicative  of major changes  in the  regimen of  the  Colorado  River . 

. It is  probable  that the  period  of  grade  which  formed  the  present flood­

plain is  a  result of  stabilization of the  Colorado  relative  to  present  sea level 

after the  last recession of the Wisconsin glaciers. 

APPENDIX 

85 

86 

t'JI.n.. 
-~vr- ~ 

V y(g{l.A,~-(rv.. 

>-'  _.--

. 

' 
Sample  160A:  North  of Colorado  River,  northwest of sewage disposal 
plant on floodplain,  in pits of Capitol Aggregate  Co.  Sample  taken  10 
feet  below floodplain  surface . 

fbs.o~ 

lbs. 

~ 
0,;{, 

.... 
w-\-% 
'P\""+~n\c 

~% 
f'-"~~ 

Ctj~  o/o 
C~..+ 
(.~h"'•) 

w•  o/o 
ia. 

w!% 
'*~ 

ltJ~ tt'o 
~=\r,

(lk.. 

w'- ol6 
to+dl 
~1\tca 

IU\­
\dctn~-
r,a""-. 

Scrc.c."  S 13c. 
'"'·  m.,.  ~ 
)a 

2032.  1.'5 

..... 

~,., 

4 
+o 
8 

-
itot.o  "·"5
1­
! 
;2032.17-"5 
.!­
! 
! 5o.8, S."S 
Z 
~o  I 
-
•10\.b  "·"5
4 
i 
l 
-
;25.4  4.4.5 
j.&l.815.~

1 

2. 
)f  ·,l.1 !~."5 
~.  '­
1  :zs.4i4.t.5 
}4  I&.3sl z.•5 
;;_ iJl.J !it.5 
8  !3.1111."5
+o  ' 
Xt  Ib.35 2.415 
i 

-
I 

~  i 

,_  

' 

('I 
8 ! ~.11  1.(,5 

~-

I

2·15, 

a.,7 
4-1 

446t 
2·7 

2,.44 
l·ll~ 

1.18 
0•11 

o.Gt9 
41·5 

47.11 

5.0 

100 

~.9 

~-1 

10.0 

241.3 

55.1. 

Sct.S 

1-4 

4.1 

lO.I 

5.1 

!O.t 

ltt.S 

Ll 

5.1 

25.2 

1.5 

5.0 

1.3 

eo.o 

~h~b f o\"6 ~-all 
,.~5 }&or 9.-q\cr 

C'f 

41• 

lt..o  5.'5  S.7  11.&  ••••  0.$  l.$  25.4  0.7 

Weathering:  The  ..A..  zone  is  poorly developed,  about  six inches  to  1  foot 
of dark  loamy  soil.  The  .. B..  zone  is  not developed. 

Caliche:  No  layers  caliche associated with  the  deposit.  A thin film  of 
caliche  present on  some  pebbles. 

Sample  1608:  In gravel  pits  of Capitol Aggregate  Co.  on the  floodplain 
of  Colorado  River,  200  yards  south of  160A.  Sample  from  coarse bed 
about  3  feet  below surface  of floodplain. 

/ /  

87 

Sc.rc.cr..,  S '.3¢ 

U'\ .  mrrt 

.. 
q> 
)a ("uj ],s 

4 
+o 
8 
2.  . 
~ ; 
4 

Itote ~~·'5 
. 
t ­
'20l.l j 7.,'5 
i-
so.s ,5."~ 
-
10\.~'" · "5 
,_ 
1 . 
;254 i 4.1t!5 
1­
'.SO s :s.cs
i 
: 

: 

1­

1 
to 
2.. 
}f  :12. .71:; "5 
+<I 
1  ;Z5.414.h5 
~ lo.ssli."s 
~0  ' 
}i 1'2·tj3- ~ 

-to  i 
~ ~~ . 35i2..S 

Y<'  r8  !3 .11  l.b5 
.1­
(1: 
8  ! 3.1111."5 

-

' ­

. 

2.lCI) 
2-2 

2.f3 
S-14 

1.88 
1·3 

1.19 
o-7 

0.44 
15-0 
as.o 

- ···­

rbs.  o~ 

l.l.)~ 

:bb. 

0/o 

w~% 
P\"'+onic. 

w~% 
~ua"t3. 

w~ o/o 
Ckc...-1­
(.(lt .. ~) 

Wt  o/o 
IS 

uJ~% 
m<t-. 

v.H  o/o 
to.•"l 
!)1\ •Cf 

-

U.'l'\­
l~¢t'\~-
C,ao'c. 

-..1~  o;o 
~e\c. 
~'SI\t 
a+-<.. 

2-!) 

5.0 

too 

4.9 

4.4 

!..0 

11.Cf 

14.7 

3.0 

4.2. 

a.s 

1.1 

Jt..~ 

4ft.~ 

a.1 

2.'--' 

2.1.C. 

2.7 

1.0 

80.0 

5u.b To\-'\- all 
i-13&~ ..v.. ~ 9 .... ~'" 

(t.ICJ 

14.1 

2.5 

1.0 

'-·" 

85.1 

1.0 

11.1 

7." 

Weathering:  Same  as  sample  160A. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

Sample  l60C:  In  gravel  pit of  Capitol Aggregate  Co.  on floodplain  of 
Colorado River.  Sample  collected 8  feet  below surface  of floodplain, 
100  yards  west of  l60A. 

ll  ~­

88 

r--------,,------.---..----­--- ... . -.--..--._---,,.-----r---r---...-----,....----, 

,._.,­
lc.4(lt'\~­
~- '  aol~ 

w+  %  1-V+  o/o 
'Piu..+un•c  'i,uar~ B 

w~ o/o 
(1.\c...-i· 
(  ~ll ..t) 

w~ o/o 
Is. 

uJ~ '16 
to+c:tl 
'l•i·ca 

4 
+o 
8 

;101 b  : ~"5 

·.203.lj  lID'S 
.l 

)f ·12. .1! ~-"s 1-.o 
!- 5 
~o 
1  2.5.4,:4&  2.0 

4  ~  12..S 

. 

"- 2.  25.0  So.o 

"· 2. 

·at. t 

41.0 

58.0 

....._~--+--~;....;:;;..-+----+---+-----lf----+------t--------1----+--­ · -+-----i 

t----+-----t--=-....;:;.,;;~---+---+--~...__--+-----t---t---­ ·---+----f----1 

~ :c.3slz. ~5 2-11 
•o  I 
t  - 5 
}2.  . 12­
: 3 .&  2.&1 
Ya  :3.11iit>5  1-4 
i­
+o  ! 
~ !".35 : 2. ~ 1.2.5  2. 

"·I

7 

-8  ! 3.1 11[  1.~5 

< 1  i  1­

: 

37·1 

~7.CG. 

79.7 

5v.bTot~1-all 
t.~s Y&~ 9...a~r  5. \&  il.l§ 

A 

-..1  2.5  Sl-4  So.~ 

Tot.l  We~~+  46·' 

Weathering:  Local  development  of a  very  poor B zone  of clay enrichment 
about three  inches  thick.  The A zone  has  been  partially leached of clay 
minerals  and  is  largely organic  material,  less  than one  foot  thick. 

Caliche:  No  development  of  caliche. 

Sample  161A:  North of the  gravel  pits  on the  floodplain  south of the 
Colorado River.  Samples  taken from  scarp facing  Town Lake 1  7  feet 
above  water level  5  feet  below the  floodplain.

I 

89 

~% 
Cf,wt.. ~3 

w._  o/o 

Clill&~ 
("li0\4-) 

w~% 
is. 

vJ~% 
Me .. 

Ito)\.  o/o 
~e\'-
Cl+-<.. 

~SI~ 

w4.  o/o 
to+-41 
51\.ca 

lUI­
\dqY\~-
&,ao\~ 

Scr&cr."  St3&  lbs.o~ 
H'\ .  mM  ~ 

:bs. 

U)4. 

0;0 

w-\.% 
'Piu.tonic 

)  8  IZo'.ziJ.'s 
I 
. 
i totb Ii..,s

4 
+o 
8  2032.  7.1tJS 

!  . 

-

! 

' 

' 

I 

I 

• 

, ­

1­

~ ! 

4 

... 0 
1 

1­
zs.4 
1 

z  I  50.8  5"5  8-9 
; 10u,l~ . ,s a.sa. 
:25.4 i~. 1.5 
15·f.
1 
ro 
'.!JO 8j S.b5  ss..a 
2.. 
)f :1z. .1!3.<.5  t'&-4 
14.o5 
lt2.l5 
}4  !&.3s! z.,s  7-12.~1. 
}i  IZ-tj3.~ 7.1.8 
~ 3 .1lltb5  2.·5 
,­
to  • 
~ jb. 35~2 . ~ t.Sl
I 
4t-IS
-
('! 
B ! 3.11  Uo5 

..0 

! 

· ­

i 

' 

q.a 

\00 

11.5 

o.a 

11.• 

8.2. 

"·" 

7.7 

15.0 

14.8 

75.8 

..., 

24.• 

o.a 

t.o 

t.O 

2.2.5 

1-1$ 

8.8 

2..Ct 

47.5 

~·· 

•, 

5u..b lo~a\- ell 
'-~S -".or 9....-Mr 

!Ia. 

.19  41.t.  a.s 

1..6.  11.4  11.S  o.s  o.s 

ta.o  o .• 

Weathering:  Top  2  to  3  feet  is  fine  loamy overbank deposit.  Soil  develop­
ment almost  negligible.  Upper foot  is  slightly darker color which  may 
indicate  the  beginning of an A zone  of organic enrichment.  No  development 
of a  B zone. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

Sample  1618:  Sample  taken  15  feet  east of  sample  161A,  from  scarp 
facing  Town Lake,  7  feet below surface of floodplain. 

90 

-

fbs.  o~ ~  w~% ~% w~ o/o  w~ o/o  uJ~%  IIJ~  tt'o 
~e\c. 
elK 

Ok,  P\""tonic  ~u.ar~3 ,  C"'c..+ 
(" ti ...~) 

lbs. 

u>~ o;o 
to+dl 
~~~  ~,\.ca 

is. 

M<~ 

lUI.-
I~<Lnh-
~,~Ol-. 

)a 

It'\ .  WIM 

Scr&c"  S •3c. 
q> 
-
2b,.l, 1,5 
i 
l tor & !~. e5 
:Z032j 7."5"

4 
+o 
8 

11.5 

97.2  2.6

lS.4  1.2.  ~.&  11.2. 

'75.8 

2.1.0 

S!.O  7., 

a.ct 

15.~  w..7  o.IJ  0.5  24.2.

12.5

4.0 

-­

~ 

2  ;so. sl5:"~ 14-ll. 
·i­
lo  i 
4 
;101.b  ~ "5 14.15 
,_ 
: 
11-lO
1 
:25.4j4"5 
I ­
TI'J 
; SJ . 8j5. ~5 u.•s
2.. 
X  I 
,_   Sl-to
2..  .1l .7  13.'-5 
.­
~ 
l5.4l4.h5 
l 
lt2.ft5
i 
~ Ib.351 Z.4t5  10·1~
..  . 
. 
:­
i 
}2.  ;f2.1 :  3. ~ 20.41 
s-sYa 
Ya  i3.1lli"5 
+o  1 
~ I ~. 35 : 2. 6S 1.!.4
i 
&1-5 

I 

0 

-

<~ ,3.11  t(t)5 

$1.0 

11.~1 

5u..b Tot"\- ell 
b~S )&or ~.qtcr 39.0 .  46,.4  1.5  4.0  jO.t  81.0  0.9  0.2.  t4.t 

Totel  We~~+  M. f!a 

Weathering:  Same  as  161A. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

Sample  161C:  Sample  taken twenty feet  east of  161B,  from  scarp facing 
Town Lake,  10  feet below surface of floodplain • 

91 

rbs.  op 

lb!> 

~ 
0/o 

...­ -... 
w~% 
P\l.l.tonic 

~ <y~ 
~u.•rt3 

w'- o/o 
Clllc....+ 
(. ~h ..~) 

w~ o/o 

iS 

uJ~% 
m<~ 

lr.)\..  o;o 
?:•\c.

()~~·~ 
a~ 

w~ <)o 
to+-dl 
!>ll•ca 

ll..\'1  -
l~(lt'\~ ·-
~, ao\c. 

Sc.rc.ct..  S 1,3c. 
H'\ .  mM  ~ 
I8l2o'.lj 1.'5 
) 

11.1 

~., 

Cia.\ 

u..o 

l.8 

0.4 

t1.7 

a~.7 

0.4 

ct.9 

ll.t 

4.ct 

tt.4 

11.2. 

71.5 

t.o 

1.0 

19... 

\.0 

i 
·­
!lot b  1t,."s
4 
, 
+o 
B  Z032.: 7."s 

_ 

1 

! 
I 

i 
i  -

. 

I 

. 

1­

1 
tc. 
l. 

z  I  5o.81 5.1.5  10-12. 
kJ  ' 
:10t.o ih."s to.15
4 
!­
I 
tl-tt.
i25.4 14.w5 
~ 5bs!s.hs
.  I 
, 

1  :ZS.414.h5 •.,. 
)f  !12. .7  !3. ~5 "··

15.7_1 

~ i 

~ l&.351 Z."S  1•12. 
}; jtz.?ji~ 1.75 
Y8  :3.1llth5  1-0 
to  I 
~ ! E,.3512 . .S  t.o 
: 
-
~s-z
('I 
8 I 5.1"l  Uo5 

. -

IS.t3 

so.-s 

G..t 

t.Gt 

38.1 

5~.A.b Tota\- a\1 

..~5 ~or 9.-..\-cr12.86 S4.t.  2.5  1-4  tf.,  85.8  0-4  o.t  t5.1  0.2. 

Weathering:  Same  as  161A,  161B. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

­
Sample  162:  Sample  from  "Doc's :t,oam Pit"  south of River,  west of 
Montopolis.  Loam  is quarried to  the  top o( the  channel  gravel.  Sample 
taken from  trench  in the  floor  of  pit  which  exposes  the  channel  gravel. 

Sera•"  s.~& 
11'\ .  WIM.  q> 

fbs.  OP  ~ 
o;o 

lbs. 

w+%  ~% 
'P\\4-fOf\ic:  ~r4 a 

w~ o/o 
Ckc..+ 
("li"'~) 

w~ o/o 
Is. 

w~ o/o  u."­
to+al 
~1\1C8 

\d¢Vl+,­
~1&\o~C.. 

92 

&.1 

4.2. 

c..a 

c.. t 

15.1  7o.4  1.0 

8·&

8.5 

' l  

(a 13.11  1.(Q5 

-

5u..b Iota\- eli  Ale  L.J..  ..,,.  1. 
,_,. 

t:.~5Yeor'3.-..tcr 

~  ~ 

1..... 

Tot.I We~~+  taO· 05 

.._, 
~ tl  10 0 

•  WW• 

a.._  l  0  2. 

• 

Weathering:  There  is the  development  of a  very thin A horizon in the 
ioam.  No  development of a  B horizon.  There  are  no  buried  weathered 
horizons  in the  overbank deposits,  although the  deposits  are  composed 
of many individual  sedimentary units  which  are  continuous  throughout 
the  pit. 

9aliche:  No  development of caliche  in either the  loamy overbank deposits 
or in the channel  gravel. 

Sample  173:  Sample  location is  approximately  2  miles  east of Webber­
ville 1  north  of the  Colorado  River.  Sample  taken from  coarsest bed 
exposed  in the  upper  half of a  gravel  pit.  Sixth  Street Terrace 

93 

-

--~ 

vJ+%  c..A% 
'Piv..ton•c  t:t,ua~~3 

w~ o/o
C"'c""'"
(~""'") 

!..V~  o/o 
18. 

•.AJ~% 
Me .. 

-.)~ cro 
~e\c.
cz+<. 

~SI~ 

u)~ 0/~ 
total 
~,\,ca 

IU\­
\~<lt\~-
,,&~C. 

fbs.  o~ 
-­
lbs 

~ 
0/o 

-

r - ­

~...,  s,~.. 
\r\  mrn_  ~ 
)a 

-
203.217.'5 
i 
: IOI b  I,_,5 
4 
+a 
B  ;Z03.2.i 7"5 

I 

-

~~-~ 

I 

. -

:  so.s!s-,~ 6- t 
2. 
1-o 
: 
4  ~10\.b! ~-"5  ,.o6t 
1­
' 
t 
~ 2-541 ~- '-5 
""' 
;50.8 i 5.05 It!a .CtCt 
2.. 
)f .1l 71~. <.5  11-4 
I_ 
~o 
'l5.4 :4.&5 ltt.15
1 
!'4  Ib.3s rz."s  8·1 
~ , r 2·10\
,!i  !I'Z .? : i&'  8.1CJ 
+!  13.1 f  ~b5 
X.  :b.35  2 .ftS  2·'-"
-~
B ! 5.11  1.to5 
il8.5A 

i 
(' I 

-

..0 

. 

; 

I 

p 

10.1 

u.~  ll.4 

, •.3 

8&.1 

tl., 

tt.,  21.S 

c.t.t 

t.l 

t.& 

$4.4 

18.6 

t1.2.  tc..t 

st.a 

0.6. 

2.0 

78.' 

.ot 

''·'­

4.4 

3().7 

5u.b Total- all  .!k)••,
b~~ Ya.oo- 9rqftr 

• 

.&
SJ. 

14.0  22.2  t.t.l 

0.'1 

(.5  81.~ 

Weathering:  The  A horizon  is  poorly developed  being about one  foot 
thick  and containing organic  material.  The  11A..  zone  is  leached of iron 
oxide I  clay 1  and  CaC03.  These  three  minerals  are  concentrated in a 
layer 6-8  inches  thick below the A horizon.  The  concentration of miner­
als  is  not  great and  the  B horizon is  not extensive. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

Sample  174:  Southeast of Montopolis I  north of the  Bastrop Road  is a 
large  gravel  pit at the  edge  of the  scarp overlooking the  floodplain. 
Sampled  a  coarse bed in the  upper  15  feet of the  deposit.  Montopolis 
Terrace. 

\./ 

94 

fbs.  oi!  w4­

~~---..~---~--- -----------------.----y--~r----y--, 
Scrc.c."  S '3& 
- .t'\ .  rWIW\  ~ 
I 

w~% ~% 
?\,.donie  CJ,ua"t 3 

lbs. 

Ofo 

> 

-
8  jto3.2.j 1,5 
i 
I 
itOib :h.e5 
4 
! 
+o 
B  ·Zo3z! 7.•s 

1.9.5  7o.5 

29.S 

~-~ ·  15.6 

1.1 

, I  J­
<B I 3.1 ~~ tCD5 

! 

2tt-l'i 
U,.CJ9 

14.!, 

Weathering:  Soil  zones  are very  poorly exposed.  There  is  no  development 
of a  B horizon 1  but there  is  some  organic enrichment in the  ..A..  horizon 
which  is  1  to  2  feet  thick. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

9S 

Sample  179:  About  2 00  feet east of Airport Blvd.  south of Webberville 
Road.  Sample  was collected from  the  large  scarp of the  Capitol Terrace. 
Samples taken from  a  coarse conglomerate  bed,  approximately from  the 
middle  of the deposit. 

..  . · --------------------.--....,.----, 

--

w~% W4% 
'P\~tonac  ~.-! 3 

w~ 0/o 
to•dl 
s&\.tca 

Cf.~  2.2..2.  ~1.2 

3(.8 

7. 3  2o.4  ,fi.1 

2.6  2?. 7 

s.t  ts.c.  68.'7  o.l  2.1  ta.1 

~ lb.35,i45  1·'7 
Y;  l1Z-1i_i4»5  IA4  5.1 

< 1  i  1­

1 

I 

B i 3.171  1Jo5 

17-'J

17.11 

!8-4 

5u..bTo\a\-all  ~GA. ~• 6 
"~~~or ~~r 

•:a.D 

... 

..-. 4 

, ,

• 

2'7.• 

Totel  W.alo\~  6.0.80 

Weathering:  The  soil profile  is either poorly exposed or  preserved  and 
also obscured by mass  wasting and  slope  wash. 

Caliche:  No  caliche developed in gravel except for  individual  pebbles of 
marl  which .have  altered completely to  soft,  porous,  spongy masses of 
white  CaC03.  There  is extensive cementation by CaC03  in the  gravels, 
but the cementation is by crystalline calcite  and  not caliche. 

Sample  65:  Gravel  pit is  100 feet east of  Decker Lane,  north of Webber­
ville  road.  The  pit is  10-13  feet deep.  Sample  taken from  coarsest bed 
of pebble conglomerate  exposed  about  5  feet  above  base of pit.  Hornsby
Terrace. 

96 

·­ ~-- · 
w~% w+%  w4­ o/o  w~ o/o  w~%  -..)~  cyo  w~ 0/o 
totdl 
is. 
1>\"'-tonic 
~1\•ca 

~r!5  Ckc.-4­
(~h....) 

me+-. 

~=~ 

a+<.. 

U.W\  -
\c:!¢f\~-
'.a\o\c.

mrn 

Scrc.c"  s.3..  fbs.o~  lA>t­
'". 
~ 
>8  12b'.ll ;,5 

lbs. 

0/o 

j 
j 
'­
I 
IOib ~~-'5 

4 
~ ;Z032i 7.,,­

I 

0 

o 

I 

i ­

~-

~0  ; 

zs.4 

2. 
i-o 
4 

. 5o.S . 5."5  0·15 
101."I".,s
,_ 

O.'l3 
I 
. 
1­
2.-lJ-i.
:25.4l4.(,5 
· .5:}.8  ~  S . OS  2..ft. 

1 
to  . 
2... 
%•2..  i1l7  ~-'-"  1-'­
1  1 
1.18 
~ !6.35  l ."5  1·9 
I 
~  I 
78 T3.11_!t.,s  2·& 
-
"-o  I 
U.  I~. 35:2 . 66  1.40 
; 
59·1"
('I 
8 ! 3.17,1.C~J5 

~ JZ.#jie5 .... 

I 
~-

4 .&5 

19.41 

1-' 

too 

4.a 

f4.5  34.8  50.,., 

too

8S.5 

1.8  58.•  ss.1  44.4 

l-1 

2..2.  58.0

?.t

s.o

'18.9 

~hLb Tot~\- ell 
'-13&~ .,.,or C]r&atcr 

4  41
• 

e.ct 

tct.o  t.t.o  C9.t 

o.s  o.1  8o.o 

Total  We~"+  fo.O 

Weathering:  A very thin A horizon of black to dark  grey organic  enrich­
ment,  6 ..  to  1  ft.  thick  is developed on  surface.  Under this  is a  1  ft. 
thick B horizon of Fez03  enrichment.  Iron oxide  was  leached from  the 
A horizon and deposited along  with clays  into  a  zone  forming  the B 
horizon.  Lower  3-6  inches  of the A horizon  shows  very  little organic 
enrichment but is  leached of iron oxide  rich clays  and  is  siltier and 
sandier than the  upper half of the A horizon. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche. 

97 

Sample  135:  Location is  north of the  Colorado  River about  1  mile  NE  of 
Webberville.  The  terrace  gravel  is  poorly exposed where  the  road  cuts 
through  the  scarp.  Sample  was  taken from  the  coarsest gravel  exposed 
to  the  east of the  road.  Hornsby Terrace. 

Sc,....."  s.3 4 ·-

H\  WlW\  q, 

rbs.  oP 
--­
ib!>. 

~ 
o/o 

·- ---·-·---­
w+%  ~% 
?\<4+on•c  Cf,u.ar4-3 

w~ o/o 
C"'c...-4­
(  '"""'~) 

w~ 9/o 

•S 

~~% 
MC~ 

!J\. cro
t-'..ua\'i 

cr_t-t.. 

u)~ o/o 
-to~dl 
!)l\iC'8 

u..n­
\~fl\'\+t-
~. alo\c. 

) 8  I!203.z.1J.'s 

I 
: 
ltOib ~~.t,5
4 
+o 
8  2032.!  7.t,'S 

2.. 
*'a 
4 

1 
t-o 
2. 

! 

; so.s i5."5 
i­
·10t."! "·"5 
:25:4: 4. ll.5 

I 

1­
:  ~s;s.  c,s
i 
i 
~-
;3.le'S
,_ 

x . 
:1~ 7 
2... 
+o 
. 
1  :zs.4  4.o5 
i 
~ Ib.3s! 2.'-s 
y;  t IZ-t ii4»5 
~ ' 
!­
t.D5 
~ j3.1l 
+o  I 
1 
... 
1
X.-~ " .35j2..S 

~ 

I 

,

('  i 

8 : 3.111  1.(,5 

,,~

+-1414, 

4.ftt 
1•14 
t.ae 
1·2. 

t-1\ 
%-8 

1.50 
2.-t 

2-f~ 
SS-141 

H.&e 

so.c. 

Wt.t 

31.& 

4.0 

15.0  2.1.1 

,,.4 

100 

as 

1.4 

IO.f.  1S.at 

lo.tt 

t.s 

5 .• 

54..2. 

5., 

5.4 

4.6» 

12-9 

5'+blot31-a\l 
1:o~s ~or- ~rutcr 

7.9() 

• 

l~-1  "'·'  44.Cf  40.~ o.2. 

o.&  cto.2.  o.a 

Weathering:  The  soil  zones  are  not  well  exposed.  There  is  a  poorly de­
veloped  zone  one  foot  thick  of organic  enrichment.  This  grades  downward 
into  a  zone  several inches  thick of leaching of the  iron oxide clays.  The 
B horizon is  a  one  foot  thick  zone  of iron oxide  and clay enrichment. 

Caliche:  No  development  of caliche in either soil zones  or the  gravel. 

Sample  150:  Location is approximately  1  mile  due  north  of Hornsby on 
the  divide  between Elm  and  Decker Creeks.  Gravel  pit  east of the  road 
exposes  a  series of  gravels  overlain by  slope  wash  from  the  Taylor Marl. 
Sampled  coarse  gravel  beds  near the  bottom  of the  pit.  Hornsby Terrace. 

98 

,.......------.~----­ · -· · --·---r-------,r-----r---r----,~--,.----. 
Scrc.c."  S '3CZ.

w~ o/o 

-­
lr'\  WIWl  ~ 

. 

w~% ~% 
:Piu.+on ic  CJ,wtr~ 3 

Ckc....+(,t.....) 

w~ 0/o 
+otdl 
51\•ca 

l.U\­
~~~~+.­
r. ao\c. 

I 
!­
IOI b IIJ .h5 
.  4 
+o 
B  Z032.i 7"5 

I  -

! 

j 

I 

~ 25414 Clt5  2-7 
1 
8 l~ ~_c: 
to 
2..  ·~. j v·o.J  2.44 
)f  ,1Z.  7 ,,3."5  4·4 
4 - L. 5 
1  ·zs.4!  .o  4.25 
~ lb.3si 2."5  8-1 
;; i12.1 li~5 _8_.44 

0 
.. 

tOO 

4  7 
• 

28.2  58.~  CI.O 

5.,  &..5  2.• 

e.2.  2.5. '1  22.1  so.o

.t. 2  72.1 

t.S 

l6t. 2. 

34--4 

54.2S 

1.5.7 

! 

< 1  i 

1­
8i3.1111.k>5 
l 
I  I 
I 

i 

Weathering:  Soil  zones  on the  original terrace  surface  are  not  present · 
because  of  erosion and  also deposition of  slope  wash.  There  is an 
· 
abnormal  amount  of clay and  iron oxide  present  in the  gravel  probably 
leached  out of the  overlying  slope  wash. 

Caliche:  No  caliche  is  present  in the  terrace  gravel.  In the overlying 
slope  wash caliche  is  developed  in the  B horizon of the  soil  zone 
developed  on the  slope  wash. 

Sample  164:  Gravel  pit north  of Webberville  Road,  weat of Walnut 
Creek.  Exposures  are  poor as  the  pit is overgrown  with cactus  and 
shrubs.  Hornsby Terrace. 
r--------------·---- ..- ~------.....----..--"""'r"--~--..-----,r----, 

Scrc.c."  S '.3• 

lbs. o~ 

'"  mM 

· - ! - --­
<\> 

Ibs. 

w~ %  lAJ+% 
P\u.+onic  CJ,~.Ut,.t 3 

w~ o/o 
C"'c.---'" 
(C:h"'•) 

'IJ~  o/o 
Is. 

99 

' 

J_ 

! IOI b  : "·"5
:2032: '­"5 

' 

4 
+o 
8 

7.2. 

100 

1 
..... 
2.. 

:25.414.(,5  2-15 
; . 
i.!XJ.S i~- &5  2.8 t 

i­

5.8 

2•.7  4-.4  40-0  28.C) 

.t.~ 

22..2  11. t  2S.O  a8.9 

2.7  .a..1 

Total  We~~+ 4§.72 

o.4  2t.s 

Weathering:  Soil  zones  are  well  developed in a 

fine  grained overbank deposit.  The  upper  1  1/2  ~'L ~rlrrgaruc
clay  : - - ------ --.,::-: -"":! 
·o  c::, ~ 0. 0  o.•  .. 
. . ,:;: 
cgt.  :••. G· ._...•· o·~ ·~-o·C 
.  ' •   •  U• 
•  .•  · ·~· 
. 
:::·:~·,·:..... -:~·:Ptl.···  san  s  one
calic  e 
._. 

feet  is the A horizon,  enriched  with organic  mater- ____ soil  __  _  !_a!.•.!!.SU­
ial.  The  B horizon is  1  1/2  feet  thick  and consists 
of  sand  and  gravel  with  a  high  concentration of 
clay-probably leached from  the  overlying organic 
· zone. 

;=:  . ~.al!~h~. 
--c: 

e lay  rich
sand & silt

\f I 

l 

ICP  • 

d  t 

Caliche:  As  indicated in sketch two  prominent 
6  inch layers  of caliche  are  present.  The  bottom 
contact of the  caliche  bed  with the  conglomerate 
is  sharp  and  non-gradational. 

Caliche: 
(cont.) 

The  sharp contacts  of the  caliche  layers  suggest that they 

originated as  deposits  of marly  slope  wash  during  reworking  of  the 
terrace  gravel.  Subsequent weathering  has  destroyed  the  texture  of 
the  original deposit and  has  altered it to  a  massive  structureless 
caliche. 

100 

Sample  167:  Gravel  pit is  north  of  Webberville  Road  about  1/2  mile 
south  of  the Airport.  Pit is  10-12  feet deep.  Sample  was  taken from  the 
east side  near the  base  of  the  wall.  Hornsby Terrace. 

101 

~--

:bs. 

Scre.ct"  s,3¢  fbs.o~ 
•njmn1l~ 
)a !2o3.z! ;,5 
i 
~ 
IIOI .b Ib."5 
8  20321 '"5 
z  sos 1 5:"s 
to 
4  10t.bi h "5 

4 
+o 

,_ 

. 

i­

,_ 

I 

1 ­

I 

I 
1­

1­

o-s~

f'() 

f / 
/2_ 
+-o 

1  25 4  i 4to5 
2..  ~8 ,5. «,5  o.Mo
127 !~. <.5  1·0
1  Z5.4l4 oS  1.0 
i b-3512'-5  s-o 
~ I 
44 
~0 
~ pz.113.e5  1».0 
Ya  \31lil._,s  3-4 
~0  i 
. ­
~ . b.35'2.6S  a.t.S
54-IS 
(''  1­

B ~3. 11' Uo5 

~_1 

.  -

! 

54-CM 

~ 

I 

5 ..... b  fc\di- all  M 
t.~sla,or 9,_~r \. 

- ·-· ·-
LLI~  % 
'P\,"Jonic 

w4­

% 

w+% 
~l.l4tr~3 

w~ '1-o 
Ck«..-4­

(' ""'" J 

o/o 

~.loJ~ 
.a 

uJ~  t:>Jo 

m<~ 

lo.J~  0/o 
';)\-Ia\~ 
~()~~·~ 
u  t"<­

1.J~  .-Yo 
1"c+dl 
~·l · ca 

I.L.Y\­
I~CZr'lh  -
C,ab\~ 

o.b 

\&.~ 

81.6 

# 

too 

1·" 

40.1. 

ft.~ 

40.tt 

5?..1 

t..! 

4.& 

5.2. 

87.9 

.,_ 

1.0 

ao.~ 

14.0 

SJ.t 

~5.t 

4-1 

Weathering:  The A horizon is  an accumulation of organic  material  6  inches 
to  1  ft.  thick.  B horizon is approximately  6  inches  thick.  It is a  dark 
reddish  zone  of concentration of  iron,  oxide  and  clay minerals  which  have 
been leached out of  the A zone.  In  some  areas  it is  a  compound  zone  with 
most of  the  clay being concentrated below the  iron oxide  zone.  Associated 
with  the  bottom of the  B zone  is  a  small  accumulation of Caco3 .  In two 
areas  it consists  of layers  of caliche  about  1  inch to  2  inches  thick.  This 
soil is developed  on a  layer of  slope  wash  of relatively recent origin.  The 
soil is  not developed on the  Colorado River  gravel. 

Caliche:  At  the  base  of the  B  soil horizon  two .areas  show a  thin layer 
of  caliche. 

The  south end  of  this  gravel  pit  shows  a  thick  development  of  caliche. · 

As  shown in the  diagram  a  unit of  solid 'caliche  is  in contact with  un;...  · 
altered  terrace  gravel. 

102 

T 

11  FEET 

.CHANNEL 

GRAVEL2,.;;.:!~ii!!:::S!t:=:~::;:::~!:;i:" 

SOl L  ZONE  - dark 
loam,  enriched with 
organic material 
Concentration  of  reddish 
cloy  at  bose. 

The  contact between the  caliche  and  the  gravel  is  sharp.  The  caliche 
seems  to  truncate  the  bedding  of  the  gravel  as  the  bedding  cannot be  traced 
into  the  caliche.  Some  textural  remnants  of  sandstone  and  gravel  e:xists  in 
·the caliche  but they do  not  appear to  be  continuous  with  the  Colorado River 
gravel.  The  base  of  caliche  deposit is  also  abrupt.  Some  ground  water 
solition and  dev:)sition cf  CaC03  has  taken  place,  as  CaC03  cementation 
is  much  greater in the  gravel  below· the  caliche  with  the  sandy  matrix 
cemented to  the  bottom  of  cobbles  ar.Ld  pebbles.  This  is  not  present in 
gravel  away from  the  caliche. 

This  deposit  probably originated  as  a  tributary  to  the  Colorado  which 
channeled  through  the  floodplain  gravels  and  filled  its  channel  with  marly 
limestone  fragments.  Subsequent weathering  has  changed  the  marly  lime­
stone  deposit into  a  massive  caliche  rich unit. 

Sample  98:  Gravel  pit is on Park  Springs  Bench 3/4 mile  south of the 
Texas  and  New Orleans  Railroad  and  approximately  3  miles  west of 
Littig.  Sample  was  taken from  wall  of  the  gravel  pit.  Asylum  Terrace . 

103 

.---------r---------~-­ - - --~--~~---y----~----~----~--------~ 

w~% ttA% 
'Piv..tuntC  CJ,ttart 3 

'-'-i~  o/o 
is. 

u.)~  ,.;1,., 
to~dl 
~,\.ca 

IJ.WI­
\O«~+-­
~.a~-. 

4 
; fOib  ~"5 
+o 
I 
8  Z03.l ; l -'-S 

z  ;5o.sT 5.~s  '7-to 
~ :10u, ;~ -'5  ?.f.~  ts.e 
r--+_-""1,-=--r;...::.=-t--+---+---1---+-~--+---~-~­ -- ---+-----l 

too 

100 

1 
+-.., 
l. 

i2S-4 i 4 "s  ~-o 
; ~8iS.  o5 
.  s.o 
. 
i 

10.4

2.5 

'7.5  78.8.  {1.3 

~.t  15D  1'7.9  !)4.~  ~-~ 

a.~ 

'7t.t. 

- ­

--1 - - --·  -+----l 

lt!l 

48.1 

Weathering:  The  A horizon consists  of  l  to  2  feet  of organically enriched 
loam.  This  overlies  the  B horizon,  a  l-2  foot  thick  layer of caliche  and 
clay enrichment.  The  "A"  zone  apparently is  leached of CaC03  and also 
clay.  These  are  concentrated in B horizon. 

Caliche:  Development of caliche  in the  soil  zone  as described above. 
Some  areas  of  the  gravel  show far  greater concentration of caliche.  Where 
sampled,  the  matrix is  largely caliche  enriched  clay.  This  however,  seems 
localized and  not  typical of the deposits  on  "Park Springs  Bench"  as  a 
whole.  The  caliche  in the  area  sampled was  concentrated  as  a  surface  ef­
fect  on the  face  of the  outcrop.  This  is  similar in many respects  to  a 
standard case hardening effect. 

Sample  136:  Location is on Park  Springs  Bench  about  6  miles  southeast 
of Manor.  Sample  taken from  coarsest beds  exposed  in  south wall  of  the 
gravel  pit.  Asylum  Terrace . 

104 

....  ----oy------.---y-----r---r---. 

w~ C?'o 
Ck._w+ 

( ,.... ~; 

lo)~  o/o 
':;W.e\4L 
h,..~.~ 
q..._ 

uJ+  'Yt:> 
to+dl 
~~\.ca 

l.L't\  -
1(4¢t'\~a  -
',aiD~«. 

wl%  w+% 
Pl""tcmac  'f,uer~ 3 

·­
; !Of b  1,  ~ r,5 

4 
+o 
8  Z03l : 7.fD5 

~~-~-+----~----+---~~---+----~----+---~~---+----~--~ 

2 
~ 
4 

5oS ' S"5  2.- 1 
10t.~ !  ., ."5  2.0Gt 

·­

1 

t'l.o 

'254 '44115  7-0~ 
!JC s,' 5 t.5 

I 

7.03 

-

1.1: ·  l 
/8  •3.1111-"5  2-<t, 
+o  I 
~ ; b.35)2.6S  2.~9 

·-

~ 

4.2

too 

100 

14.t

0.9  10.2.  87.\ 

1CI.&  '-0.,  2.1 

5 l 
. 

z.-tt~ 
2C..78 

§4..0 

! -

' 

i 

i 

: 

(  8 : 3.11-1  1.to5 
I  I
I1 
l 

Weathering:  The  A horizon  is  approximately  1  foot  thick  and composed of 
grey organically enriched  loam.  The  lower half is  distinctly  leached  of 
clay and  is  lighter gray  in color.  Directly below the A horizon  is  6  to  8 
inches  of iron oxide  enriched clay.  Below this  is  4  inches  to  1  foot  of 
clay enriched  gravel.  The  clay is  light  gray in color and  apparently con­
tains  a  ·small  percentage  of CaCO 3 . 

Caliche:  No  caliche development in the  gravel. 

Sample  163:  Location is  200  feet  south of Manor  Road,  a  mile  east of 
the  Municipal Airport.  Sample  was  taken from  low  scarp exposed in 
road cut.  Asylum  Terrace 

105 

w4­

0/o 

~--,---

w+%  1-U+% 
'PI...tonic.  <i,uar~3 

LtJ~  o/o  W  ..  o/o  w~%  1&,)\.  o/o 
?;e\c. 

rnc:t­

Is 

c~o~~..+ 
('"I'"'..) 

~SI~ 

elK 

.w4  'Yo 
+o..al 
":>1\.ca 

U..t'\  ~ 
\dCZW'\~~
~~e\ol~

t4.t. 

100 

4.t. 

t.S.O  1•.2.  4l.f.  Cf.1

+4.2

-

1.8  1&-~  11.4  &..f.

t.~  •.cs  2-lS

5.9  4.t 

.,_,.  St.1  0.4  0.4  U.ct 

--·-·-- . 

-·­

t•lieh& 

,....~'-' 

2.~/J 

lbs. 

fbs. o~ 

Scree.,  S '3« 
ll'\ .  mM  ; 
>8  Zo3.l,  ],5
I 
I tot&: ~-',5  11-6\ 

i 

4 
+o 
B  ;Z032. : 7 ft/5 

i ­

i 

ll44~ 

I 

i 

ltf.SS
z  lso. sls-"~  CI·IO 
1­
:101.b ; "  "5  ~.-.3 
~ 
4 
14-lt
)f  1Z. .71 ~--5 ,_, 

. 
,_ 
:25.4! 4.(.,5
. 
; 
:50.8 
S.b5 
1

1 

I~ 

I 

2... 

~,., 

I 

,_ 

.-o  . 
!..... 
1  Z54 i4.a5  '7.18
~!  ·­
7-114
I  b -35 i Z."5 
'4 
:­
+o  : 
}2_  !ll -1 :  3~ '1.12. 
1 
l-14
Ji  ;3.1l !l"5 
j-
~0  i 
X.  lb. 35 , 2 . ~ 2,.12 
i- 44-t 
('; 
414.13 
•
sa.c.cJ 

~~.,I 
..-v..b  10  a\- el  4 ,.l! 

c. 
\ 
b~S Ya.o.- '3.-..~r 

.. 

8  ~  3 .1 ~,1.Co5 

"""" 

, 

I

~.l 

•
to.c. 
11.8 
...
v..t. 
'-·' 
a.t• 
7.3 

a.~• 
2,. t 

41..! 

1,.4• 
54.t.• .. 

.. 

.. 

• 

• 
15.0  4.5 

• 
t1.t  1'5· 1  So.ct  s.t  .oa  at.a  7.8 
43.4  1.0  Jf.~  so.rr  t.1.o  2,. t  O.IJ  22.0  s.s 

• 

• 

... 

.. ~~ .... ~.\ calcc..le\-ccJ 
'•OM  ~aMple  +kc.  8  i-..c.h  ~(.let'  i'll\  ~C. 
4\  -&"  r""an~c. 

f'CMOVI·f\, 

•'""-wo

Weathering:  Soil  horizons  are .not  exposed,  as  the  original  surface  is 
modified. 

Caliche:  Extensive  development  of caliche  in the  gravel.  Caliche  follows 
plant roots  down in vertical  rod-like  deposits.  Also  extensive  development 
of caliche  in coarser gravel beds .  Most extensive deposits  are  in the 
upper part of an individual  bed and  then decreases  with  depth  in each bed. 
Face  of outcrop  shows  caliche developed  as  a  case  hardening  effect in 
that  it is more  extensively developed  on  surface  of outcrop  than  3  to  4 
inches deep in the  gravel. 

· 

Sample  165:  Sample  collected at  the  municipal  airport,  200  feet  west 
of  the  western mo·st runway.  Sample  collected from  coarsest bed  in a 
gully  about  8  feet ' deep.  Asylum  Terrace. 

106 

_,.... .-... ... 

lbs. o~ ~  w+%  ~ <r~  Wt  o/o 
Ckc....4­
("""'~) 

0/o  P\u..+onic 

<i,u.erL3 

lbs. 

·  .;~  o/o 

IS. 

w~ o/o 
m<~ 

~~ o/o  w~ ·vi') 
to~dl 
~e\~&. 
~,\ . ca 
~s.\o!. 
a•c. 

I.LY\  -
\~(lr\~-
r, ~lo\c.

[ Scrc.c.,  S '_3«. 
,.,. '  mrn 

~ 

)  B  .2o3.l  , ],s 

! 

i 
i 
' fOib  j ~"5 

4 
+o 
B  2032j  ] .fD'S 

7.t 

2.4.4  '75.6» 

100
-­

~.0  1.4  11.1  ~J.o 

5.8  42.& 

l4.,  iet.t.  11.1  49.7 

o.s  t.a· 

8t.t
- ··­

0.3

2 
1-o 
4 

!so.s ! 5"'S  5·2. 
; 10\.b 1 ~ .,5 

1  !254 :4.<.,5  .... 

5.1!. 

I 

I 

i,!,0.8! 5. 05 
i 

tC') 
c..s 
l. 
}f  '1l 1 !:;. ~5 iO·ct 
.-o 
1  zs.4 :4.c5  to.-s..
l4  Ib.3slz. ~s to·l5 
' -
+o  . 
!i i IZ .?  3.c5 
Y8 
-to  . 
~ : " .35:2.eS 

to.~ 
; 3.1111.~5  ~-14~ 

·­

1.~1 

15.1

5.4

<~ i3Hitb~ 15-4 

·~-25 

48.8 

5u..b Toto\- ell  f,!  {q 
1ai.;,IS Y&.or  9"'q'"r 

• 

lo.7  8·~  2CI.Cf 

'&Cf.O 

o.t.4  ~.s  es.~  o.t4 

Total  Wc~k~  1% .2§ 

Weathering:  A and  B horizons  are  not  well  developed.  Slight  leaching of 
clay and  iron  oxide  from  the A horizon and  concentration in the  B horizon. 
There  is  a  small  amount  of  enrichment of  org~nic material  in the A horizon. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche  in the  deposit. 

Sample  166:  Location at airport,  north  of  the  offi.ce of Ragsdale Aviation 
just  south of Avenue  51.  Exposure  in a  vertically walled  gully about  9 
feet  deep.  Gully  has  been  subsequently filled  obliterating  sample 
locality.  Asylum  Terrace. -·- -··-------.----------.r-------.., 

w~% ~% 
'Piu.tonic  CJ,uar~ ~ 

w~ o/o 
Clilc...+ 
('"liO\i-) 

u.)~  o;<':> 
to.,dl 
s1i 1ca 

107 

too 

too 

too 

11.~  ~1-f.  ?..1 

fbs.  o~ u.>+ 

.b 
I  s . 

o/o

~ io.3slz."s  s-~"" 
y;_  ill -1 iit,.5  ~.2..2 

q."J 

8  !  3.11­

< t  i 

I 

1­

1.Co5 

12.•0
12,.0 

5u..blot-'\-all  •~.,  ,,.

'-~sl2~9~r14·':)  t  •.o  lGt.C.  &2,.0  'SS.(o 

4-5 

'1'1.'  t .o 

Total  We~~+  tSI.15 

Weathering:  Soil  zone  is  not  exposed,  as  the  top of the  deposit  has 
been considerably altered by earth moving  during  construction at the 
airport. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche  in the  deposit. 

Sample  183:  Location is one  half block  west of South  First Street in an 
excavation for  a  city water tank.  Sampled coarse  bed  of chert  gravel 
exposed  under St.  Elmo  Bench  Terrace  Gravel.  Delaney Terrace· 

108 

fbs.  o~  w4­
ibs. 

0/o

w-"% 
'P\""+on\c 

w+% 
~r~~ 

w~% 
C"'e~

u·,,"'.) 

w~ o/o 
Is. 

uJ~% 
~~ 

uJ4- o/o 
-to+-dl 
~1\IC8 

II.V\­
\d¢t\h­
f ,alo\c. 

lo.)~  <t'o
t;e\c.
"'"' 

cz+<:. . 

'r\ 

)a 

Seree"  S 1,3& 
rnrn.  ~ 
-
2032.  1,5 
i 
4  !IOf .b  j ,  .•5  8-1 
+o 
8 

!203.2! 7.,5 

8.1ct 
'7-8

j 

! 
:5o.8  5,5 

t 
tr. 
z. 

2. 
*'o' 
4 

2.  :1l .1  3.~5 
; ;   ! 
. 
+-o 

l10t.b  ,,,5  7.5
!25.41 ~. to5 8-tt. 
jS0.8jSb5  8.15 
~- 2·~
-
1  IZ5.4 j4.'5  2.W. 
~ j&.3sjz.•s 5-14
•o  j 
; -
}2_  i IZ.J !3·" s.aa 
~ 1 3. 1~r~·s  1-2. 
Xt  tb.35;2 . .S  1.1s 
tt-8 
<~ 13.11  1.Co5 

l 

ft.5 

f8.o

~.0 

71.0 

16.5

10.& 

..ca.2. 

1.00 

100 

19.2. 

12..8 

71.8 

15.~ 

84.~ 

5.8

f.t 

18.& 

4S.S 

21.0 

,.4 

'-2.3 

3. 2. 

t2.ct

2..5

25.2.

51.Lb To\'a\- ell  27.09 SS.7

t.~5~~9~r  • 

o.t  21.~ t.a.o  ..,.~ 

6..2.  Cit.,  ~.1. 

Weathering:  No  development of  soil  horizons,  but  the  deposit is  strongly 
altered by the  enrichment of caliche and clay which  has  leached down 
from  the  overlying limestone  pebbles. 

Caliche:  Extensive development of caliche.  CaC03  is  washed  down from 
overlying limestone  pebbles.  Matrix of the deposit is  punky,  soft,  massive 
and  enriched in CaC03  and clay.  Many  smaller limestone  pebbles  have 
been totally altered.  The  original texture  is obscured by the  heavy alter­
ation of finer  grained rocks . 

Sample  24A:  Sample  taken from  terrace  deposit of  the  North  Fork  of 
Wilbarger Creek due  east of Cele.  Sampled  the  coarsest bed exposed. 

109 

fbs.  OP 

lbs. 

~ 
0/o 

w~% 
?\""ton ic: 

~% 
CJ,U&rt:~ 

w~% 
Ck&r-4­
(~"""~) 

w~ o;o 
Is. 

uJ~ o/o 
~~ 

~~ o/o 
~e\& 
~~~ 
czt-c.. 

w~ o/"-> 
to+dl 
~·l~ca 

U.Y\­
\~IZY'\4-, -
~, ~o\e. 

Sc........,  St3 ¢ 
\1"\ .  mM  <t 
-
)a 
2o3.2.  1,5 

I tOI.b I~. ,5 
4 
+o 
8  1203.lj 7.,5 

I ­

1 

I 
~J-
I  so.s, 5"5 
2. 
~ 1 
4  !10t.b  ~ . ,5 

, , ­

a-ct

··~'-

4 .b5

1~4.CW.

' 
1­
j.50.81 S.t,S 

1  125.4  4.(.5  14-t 
~· 
2.  :12. .7  ..,,,,.  ,_.. 
x l 
+o 
' 
1  ;l5.4 
\.\8 
}4  Ib.3s z."s  o-tl 
!1.  112 ­ 1 !3.b5  o ..., 
Ys  i3.111l."s  o-5 
+o  ! 
~ i b.35 j2 . .S  o.~J 

~0  ; 

1­

-

! 

(~ lm -1.Co5 

2.-4

2..2.5 

91.0 

CJ6.o 

9'-·3 

f5.0 

CII.O 

1.0 

~~., 

•. 2. 

S,.8 

4.0 

1\.0 

ea.s 

s.1 

1'1.8 

2.8 

f. 'L 

~-~ 

5u..bTo\"a\-all 

'-..,cs ~at- 9.-..\cr- 2.  •0  8/..7 

~~ 

ft.S  81.3  ~!S 

C¥5.5 

Weathering:  Three  and  a  half feet of dark  black  soil is developed. .  No 
gradation in contact  with  the  conglomerate.  Weathering  is  similar to  soil 
developed  on  the  Taylor Marl. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche  in  the  deposit. 

Sample  248:  Sample  collected from  floodplain  of the  North  Fork  of 
Wilbarger Creek,  about  100  yards  downstream  from  sample  24A.  Sample 
taken from  coarsest conglomerate  bed exposed  in the  channel on the 
floodplain. 

110 

-

rbs.o~  ~  w-4-%  ~% w4­ o/o  w~ o/o  wi o/0 
'PI"'tonic  'f,u.ert~  Ck«....+­
rn< ... 
('"11..+) 

l3 

0/o 

lbs. 

IIJ~ o/o 
~e\c. 
~51\!. 
Cl~ 

uJ~ o;o  U.¥\­
to+c51 
SI\IC8 

\c.{4Zr\~-
~ ,ela\c. 

Se,........  s 1,34 
'"·  mrn.  ~ 
)a 

-
2032.  1.'5 

-

T 

• 

7.h'S 

tOI.b  b .h5 

1 
;203.2. 
i 

4 
+o 
8 
2.  !5o.6  54.5  t·2. 
1­
~ : 
4  !10\.b . h.h5 
~-t~ 
!­
i25.4 i4.t,5 
tl-\S
j.50.8 15.h5 st.at 

1 
t-o 
z. 
x' 
·t-o
2..  !12. .1  ~.,5 
1  Jzs.4 
4.h5 
l.o 
~  &.35  Z."5 o-ti 
IZ.# jih5 
0·'-'
i 

~  r  o-C.
8  3.11  1."5 
... 0 
~ :b.35?.es o.\8 
(~ f ml1.~o5  2.-1 

~ 

~ i 

~0 

-

t..\ct 

44.1  s~., 

,.3  9&4  J.~ 

100

eta.?

"·.s  81.S  s.t 

S-2.  ct&-7

llt 

.,.s 

to.4\ 

'·"

t.Cf 

tf.~ 

.CM 

5u.b Iota\- all 

,.~s~~s~rt~.  a•.o 
To+-al  Wc~h~  14. , ,  

!1.4  81.?  J.4 

0.4  ct9.0 

Weathering:  One  foot  of dark  black  soil on the  floodplain.  Similar to 
the  soil developed  on the  Taylor  Marl. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche  in deposit. 

Sample  54:  Sample  location approximately  1/2  mile  east of Dessau on 
the  north bank of Gilleland  Creek.  Sample taken from  conglomerate 
beds  in a' terrace  expos~d in the  terrace  scarp. 

111 

fbs.  o~  lA>+ 

Ok, 

lbs. 

w-4-%  ~% Wt  o/o  w~ <ro  uJ~%  IJ~ cro  w~ O/o 
'P\""+onic  'f,U.r~a  Cke..+ 
Ia. 
("""'•) 

f:e~ 
~;.\!. 
tl~ 

tof-c!l 
51\ICi 

MC~. 

IU\-
\dctnh­
~.ab\~ 

Scree..,  S '3C. 
ll'\.  mi'Y\.  ~ 
-
)a 
2b3.l  1.'5 

tot.&  h.h5 
I 

4 
+o 
B  l2032  7.1tl5 

z. 
J,l 
4 

lso.s  5."5
l10t.b  ,,,5 

t·5
! 
-
j25.4  4.C.5 
1 
-
to 
!.508  5.~ f.,t
2.. 
XI 
t-4t
.!- i1l.7  3.~5 
4.h5 
1  ·Z5.4 
t ... 
}4  &.35  z.'s  !.·It
,_ 
•o 
~ JZ.J  3.h5  !.41 
-
l-1
~ 
3.1}  1."5
+o 
2.-s 
Y4  ~.35 
t·44 
-
5.11  1.C.5 

,,.. 
'"$(. 

<~ 

I 

'J.7 

12.5 

ft.A 

'-·4

(,o.O

too

81.6 

.,.a

5u.b Tota\- all 
'-~s"'-orgi"U\cr\• 

e6 

To+el  W.~h+ .22.0 

4•·• 

'·" 

Weathering:  No  exposures  of the  soil development on the  terrace. 

Caliche:'  Caliche is developed  as thin coatings  on individual  pebbles 
in the  deposit. 

Sample  168A:  Sample  location is in gravel  pit  south of Old  Manor Road 
in a  terrace  of Walnut Creek.  Pit is  now a  city dump 1  and  25-3 0  feet 
deep.  Sample  was  taken from  the  coarsest of the  conglomerates  near 
base  of the  pit. 

112 

Ser&Cf'l  S 13C  fbs.o~  ~  w-+%  ~% w~ <Yo  w~ cro  uJ~%  lo.)\..  o/o  w4.  0/o 
~e~  total 
~t\•ca 
lr\ .  mM  ~ 
(l+<.. 
)a 

er-r'- a  Ckc~ 
("li"'t) 

'P\""tonic 

0/o 

lbs. 

is. 

PM~. 

~s.\!t 

U..Y\­
\d~tlh-
~tl!b\~ 

2,., 

Ct().O 

54..0 

4.0

ft.C.  2.5  1.7  5.4  as., 

•. 7  1.1  0.4

~~ 

i 

4 
+o 
8 

-
203.l  1,5 
,IOI.b  ,,,5 
-
'Z03.l  7.•5 
' 
l 
,_ 
j so.sl5."5
4  1101.4,  ,,,5 
,_ 
' 
!25.414.1.5 
-
,.50.8  5.tt5 

z. 

~ 

t-ct

11~
'1-'1~

l 
to 
2.. 
%! 
2..  ~1l.1  ~.,5 
~:  4.e5 
1  iZ5.4 
7.4? 
)4  &35  l.t.5 15-9 
IZ.Jji~ 
}i 
i 
,­
y, 
8  3.1 t 11."5
+o  I 
. 
-
X.  ,&.35.2.-s  5.8_1
-
28-1~
,  I 
(a  1 
3.1-;  1.CP5 

5-1~

~0 

_i 

16.~ 

ct.&

I~A ... 

48.1

t)v..b lor,\- all  CJ.o~ 
fa~S ,!I& or 9~r  • 

f5.2  2.1  J.4  4.5  '7Cl2 

11.8  5.~  t.o 

Total  Wc~k+  59.25 

Weathering:  Upper part of the  terrace  deposit is marl.  The A horizon  is 
a  one  foot  layer of dark  black  soil developed in the  marl.  Directly below 
the A horizon is a  3-4 foot  zone  of caliche  leached out of the A horizon. 
The  soil is · a  spongy 1  massive  unit  which obliterates  all  bedding.  Grades 
doWI)ward  into  marl  and  gravel. 

Caliche:  Developed as  a  thick  zone  at the  base  of the  "A"  soil  horizon. 
Strong CaC03  cementation throughout the  deposit but caliche development 
is restricted to  the  base of the  soil  zone . 

Sample  1688:  About  150  yards  west of  sample  location  168A. 

113 

w-\-% 
P\~+o"ic 

~0'ro 
~r£.3 

~% 
c~..+ 
((."li"'~) 

w~ o/o 
Ia. 

O,b

wl% 
~~ 

..,l 't'o 

t!;!\ 

iZK. 

wl. o/o 
m~dl 
5t\tC8 

u.."­
\~elf\~-
r,ablc. 

Scr""  S '.3C. 

fbs.  o~ w'­

\r\.  mm  +  lbs. 
-
)a 
2b3.l  1,5 
4 tou, i'-'5 

+o  • 
8  !2032..  7-ltJ'S 

i ­

! 

1 

I 
2.  .so.s
+o! 
4 

t.-5
s.st 
t0-1!.

5"'5
!10t.b  '-·'5 
' 
-
i25.414.1.5 
1!il.8' 5.65 
...., 
2. 
i 
1­
X  I 
:1Z. ­ 7  3 .-5 
2­
1­
~ ! 
1  'l5.4 i4.h5 
ItOM
}4  &.35! z.,5 let~ 
}i  IZ-1!3.~ IU...CJ7 
l-8  ,3.1 JJies  "-2. 
~ ib. 35,2.~ "·t~ 
<~ ,5.11  -1.1.5 
37-44 

~0 

~0 

i 

j 

-

I 

5'7.28 

+.5 

l4."

22.8

8.1 

50.0 

5u..b fo\a\- all  .{4.~  I•. I 

~~s~~g~r 

• 

'1.5 

5.8 

24.2. 

54.1 

4.1 

35.0 

2.5 

2.3 

4.9 

'75.2. 

J4.1 

7.2 

~·· 
0.9 

5.5  2.7  to.at  10A 

t2..0  15.3  0.65 

Weathering:  Same  as  168A. 

Caliche:  Same  as  168A. 

Sample  171:  Sample  location is  200  feet north of St.  Elmo  Road  north of 
Williamson Creek.  Several  large  gravel  pits  about  2 5  feet deep.  Sample  , 
was  taken from  the  upper  10 feet  of the  deposit.  St.  Elmo  Bench. 

114 

rbs.o~  ~  w+%  ~% w4- o/o  w•  o/o  uJ~%  loJl.  cyo  w4- 0/o 
'P\""fonic  CJ,wtr~a  Cke..4­
("""'.) 

-to~dl 
s•l·ca 

~e\c. 
~SI~ 
aK 

% 

lbs. 

~+-

ls 

LU\­
\~~tnh-
(:I &lo~C. 

Scree."  S 134. 
H'\ .  mm 

)a 

· ­

i 

T 

. 

: -

!­

1-o  : 

<\> 
-
2032.11'5 
i 
ltotb ~~-"5 
4 
•­
+o  • 
8  203.2.17"5 
z  :so.sl5:"'"  q.s 
4  10'-"!" ,s CI.Sct
14-4
1  125.4 : 4.l.t5 
~0  . 
: .!iJ 8 is. cs 114.2.5 
2. 
}f  !12..713. ~5 tl·!. 
j-
+-o 
1  :zs.4 i4."5  tt.tq 
~ J6.35l Z."s  Gt-5 
~0 
}i  IZ -t  !3.b5 
"·~1 
Jl8  3.1lll.t,5  t -12. 
1­
~0 
.Y4  :b.35,2.6S  1.'15 
1?.-2. 
('I  .1­
B  5.1 11Uo5 
! 

: 

;  ­

i 

11.3.15 

2!..2 

76.8

u.o 

&9.0

2..0  •a.o 

%5.2. 

tJ.O 

2.0

ll·" 

15.5 

2.0.t 

11· ~

!a. t

2~.5

5u.b To\a\. all  .M..c-3  51.2, 
~~s ~~ 9.-..\cr 

• 

Total  We~~+  55.81 

tf. 2.  88.8 

11.2. 

Weathering:  The  ..A..  horizon is developed as  1  1/2  feet of dark black ·and 
grey organically enriched loam. This  grades  into a  B horizon  2  to  3  feet 
thick  with  a  strong development of caliche and clay. 

Caliche:  Development of caliche is common  in the  B horizon of the  soil 
zone  but there  is very little caliche in the  gravel.  The  gravel  shows 
strong cementation by CaC03,  not caliche. 

Sample  172:  Sample  location is  southofMontopolis about  75  feet  east 
of Montopolis  Drive  on St.  Elmo  Bench.  Sample  taken from  coarsest 
gravel exposed in the  wall  of a  gravel  pit below the  caliche  zone. 

115 

i 

.  -

lbs 

Sc,....."  s '3&  fbs.o~ 
'"'  mrn  ~ 
)a 

-
Zo3.l: 1,5 
i 
; tot t,  1*'·"5
4 
+o 
B  :zo3.zi 7.e5 
z  !so.s! 5"5  2-8 
f.o  ! 
'101.b! h.,5  2.5
4 
i 
9-"
. 
!­
1 
i25.4' 4.(D5 
I­
t... 
: .!lb.8 ; 5. &5  q.l8
2. 
}f :12. ­ 71:;.,,.  ll·Jf 
~ 
l5.4 i4.h5  II.Ctct
1 
Y4  !t>. ~sl z."s 8-0 
+o  I 
: ­
~ !tz . 7;3.  ~ 8.0 
}8  !3.11ji.h5  2-4 
+o  i 
~ :b.35i2-~ 1.2.5 
11-'7 
(' .  1­
8 ! 3.1111.to5 

I_ 

:­

. 

I 

I 

. 

I 

11.44 

- . ·­ .. 
w-\-% 
'P\1.4~onic 

u.N­

o/o 

w+  o·/"o 
~"~3 

w4-% 
c~..+ 
(~li"'H 

w~ o/o 
Is. 

w~ ~o 
me._ 

5.5 

10.1 

fOO 

5'1.4 

'-2-" 

ts.& 

o.~ 

'·'­

f~.CJ 

84.l 

t'l.? 

s.o 

25.~ 

...J~  o;o

?:e\c. 

~SI~ 

uJ~ ·.Yo 
+otal 
~1\•ca 

lUI­
IO¢n+-.­
~, alo~~ 

(Z+'C. 

-

too 

3'1.4 

t5.5 

5u.b lot6\- ali  _25  5

fa~~ ~a.- srutcr 

• 

., 

52.0  0.1  0.8  ~.1 '*·' 

!8.9 

Weathering:  The  "A"  soil zone  is a  2-3  foot  thick  zone  of organic  enrich­
ment.  This  grades  into a  zone  3  to  4  feet  thick of caliche  enrichment,  and 
the B horizon grades  down into  relatively unaltered  gravel. 

Caliche:  The  zone  of caliche enrichment lies below the A horizon of the 
soil and  is  gradational down int<?  the  gravel.  The  "B"  zone  is  3  to  4  feet 
thick,  and  the  alteration is  so intense  that all  structures  and bedding 
are  obliterated . 

Sample  56:  Sample  location is  south of Gregg  Lane  approximately  1  mile 
southeas:t. of  Dessau.  Sample  was  taken from  the  top  of a  ridge  in a 
gullied  area  near Gilleland  Creek  where  a  coarse  bed of cobbles  is 
exposed. 

116 

w+ 

w+% 
0/o  P\1.4.tonic 

~% 
Cf,t.Utr~3 

w~ o/o 
Cli\tri­
(~I'"'~) 

w~ o/o 
Is. 

uJ~% 
~~ 

lo)\..  o/o 
~e\& 
"'\!.
Cl+c. 

w~ q;-(';) 
+oh51 
51\•ca 

IU\­
\d«nh­
~~able. 

Sc,.tc"  S 1,3c. 

fbs.  o~ 

lr\.  mn1. 

q>
-
2o3.ll1'5 

)a 

4 
+o 
8 
z  r 

~I 
4 

IOib i ~ . h5 
i ­
I 
!203.2.  7.h5 

.So.s 

' 5""5
i10\.b  .,.,5 

1 

~ 25. 4  4.t.5 

. 

? 'i.!lb.815.t,5 
}f !1z1!3.'-s 
~0 
;l5.414.b5 
i 
~ jo. ~s~~'s 
~ ltZ -1 !  3.~~ 
~ j3.1il1.,5 
to  . 
~ !~.35,2 . -.5' 

1­

('I 
813.11  1.to5 

-

lbs. 

3·15 

3.ct4 
a-ts 
3.81 
2-1 

2.0f:, 
3-4 

~.25 
1·2. 

t.t~ 
1&·8 

1~.5 

M.CJ 

'-5.1 

34.1 

22.1 

15.4 

2.5 

22.1 

~.0 

4o.9 

6.1 

a.o 

14.2. 

t3.8 

7.5 

tt.5 

4.0 

4q.o . 

5u..b lora\- aii 
'-~sYa.Ol'"3~r 

~ Sl 
• 

!.5.5 

2S.S  70.4 

· e. I  25.3 

" 

Weathering:  Top  of deposit weathers  like  the  Taylor Marl,  composed of 
approximately  1  1/2  feet  of dark  black  soil which grades  down  into a  3 
foot  zone  of caliche  development.  These  soil  zones  are  the  matrix for 
numerous  cobbles  and  pebbles  of lag deposits. 

Caliche:  There  is  a  heavy development of caliche in the  deposits, 
especially at base of A horizon . . As  in the  Taylor Marl  soils the  caliche 
development  grades  downward  into light tan Taylor Marl  about  4-5  feet 
below the  surface . 

Sample  177:  Sample  taken from  gravel  pit  associated  with  a  scalping 
operation on a  hill top,  1  mile  northeast of Bastrop.  Sample  was  taken 
from  conglomerate  beds  in trench  in the  floor  of the  gravel  pit.  Manor 
lag gravel. 

117 

fbs.oP 

lbs. 

w4­

0/o 

w.t% 
'P\u..to" ic: 

~% 
'l,t4a"~3 

w+  o/o 
C"'c...-4­
("li"'~) 

w~ o/o 
Ia. 

vJ~ <ro 
~~ 

..,J\..  cro 
~=~ 

(ltC.. ­

w~ (Yt:) 
to+-dl 
~1\aca 

U..¥\­
1dczrth­
~I &\o\~ 

Scrc.c. ..  S 1,3c. 
'n  mrn.  ~ 
-
)a 

2b3.l  1,5 
-
,0,bI"·"s 

4 
+o 
8  !2032' 7."5 

I 

-

too 

100 

1.0 

CJ,.o 

s .• 

.s.2. 

_j_ 

~ . 

:zs.4 

.10t.b 
j 

!.jsoa 5,5  iO·S 
"·"5
4 
fO.Jt.
1  125.41 ~. (,5  tt.-tt. 
t-f't 
!&>.8·5.b5  11.15 
2.. 
);I
2.  .1l..7  3 .'-5  !5-S 
4.o5
l 
S-18
!t4  !&.35 z."s  2-ts 
Ji  pz.7;3.05 
}8  :3.1 Jji:•s  o-ts 
+o  I .  -
~ ~~- 35 , 2.~ o.4~ 
-1.to5 
t.t-a 

l 
<~ ,3.11 

~-·4 

..0 .  

·  -

I 

18-9 

ts.s 

q.s 

89.7 

ct.as 

1· 2. 

lt.c. 

8&.5 

... 4 

,., 

4f.t. 

t.t..~ 

5u..b Iota\- •II  18.
'-~S >&or 9rqtcr 

.tS  ~~...,  o.t.  "·5  q2.t 

l.1 

')6.~ 

Weathering:  No  soil  zone  developed  as  the  top  of  hill  has  Qeen cut 
down  and obliterated. 

Caliche:  No  development of caliche  in the  deposit. 

REFERENCES  CITED 

BARTON,  D.C.,  1930,  "Deltaic Coastal Plain of Southeastern Texas",  Geol. 

Soc.  America  Bull.,  v.  41,  no.  3,  p.  192-204. 

BRYAN,  F.,  1933,  "Recent Movement on a  Fault of Balcones  System,  McLennan 
County,  Texas",  Am.  Assoc.  Petroleum Geologists  Bull. ,  v.  17,  no.  4, 
p.  439-442. 

1933,  "Evidence of Recent Movements Along  Faults  of  Balcones 
System in Central Texas",  Am.  Assoc.  Petroleum Geologists  Bull.,  v.  20, 
no.  10,  p.  13 57-13 71. 

DAVIS,  W.M.,  1954  (1909  ed.),  "Geographical Essays",  New York,  Dover 

Publications,  Inc.,  p.  777. 

DEUSSEN,  A. ,  193 0,  "Geology of the  Coastal Plain of Texas West of the  Brazos 
River",  Reprint by Bureau of Economic Geology of the  University of Texas 
of the  1924  U.S.  Geol.  Survey Prof.  Paper  126,  p.  145. 

FOLK,  R.  L.,  1961,  "Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks",  (laboratory manual The 

University of Texas),  Hemphills,  Austin,  Texas,  p.  154. 

FOLK,  R.  L.,  and WARD,  W .C.,  1957,  .. Brazos  River Bar: A Study in the 

Significance of Grain Size  Parameters" ,  Jour.  Sed.  Petrology,  v.  2 7, 
no •  1 ,  p •  3-2 6 • 

HILL,  R.  T .,  1891,  "Notes  on the  Geology of the  Southwest",  Am.  Geologist, 

v.  7,  pp.  367-368. 

1901,  "Geography and Geology of the  Black and Grand Prairies, 

Texas",  U.S.  Geol.  Survey Twenty-first Annual  Report,  part  7. 

HILL,  R.  T.,  and VAUGHAN,  T. W.,  1896-97,  .. Geology of the Edwards  Plateau 

and Rio  Grande  Plain Adjacent to Austin and San Antonio,  Texas  with 
Reference  to the Occurance of Underground Waters",  U.S.  Geol.  Survey 
Ann.  Report,  no.  18,  part II,  p.  195-321. 

JOHNSON,  D.  W.,  1944,  "Problems  of Terrace  Correlation",  Geol.  Soc. 

America  Bull.,  v.  55,  no.  7,  p.  793-818. 

KRUMBEIN,  W.C.,  and  PETTIJOHN,  F.J.,  1938,  11 Manual of Sedimentary 
Petrography",  Appleton-Century-Crafts,  Inc. ,  New York,  p.  549. 

MACKIN,  J .H.,  193 7,  "Erosional History of the Big Horn Basin,·  Wyoming", 

Geol.  Soc.  America  Bull.,  v.  48,  no.  6,  p.  813-8S4. 

118 

119 

MATHIS,  R.  W.,  1942,  "Heavy Minerals  of Colorado River Terraces", 

M.S.  Thesis,  Univ.  of Texas,  Geology Library. 

QUINN,  J.H.,  1957,  "Paired River Terraces  and  Pleistocene  Glaciation", 

Jour.  Geology,  v.  65,  no.  2,  p.  149-166. 

SNEED,  E.  D.,  and  FOLK,  R.L.,  1958,·  "Pebbles  in the  Lower Colorado River, 

Texas,  A Study in Particle  Morphogenesis",.  Jour.  Geology,  v.  66, 
no •.  2,  p •.  114-150. 

STRICKLIN,  F. L.  Jr. ,  19 61,  "Degradational Stream  Deposits  of the  Brazos 

River,  Central Texas",  Geol.  Soc.  America  Bull.,  v.  72,  no.  1, 
p.  19-36. 

THORNBURY,.  W. D.,  1954,  "Principles  of Geomorphology",  John Wiley and 

. Sons,  Inc.,  New York,  p.  618. 

URBANEC,  T.,  1963,  "River Terraces  and Associated  Deposits  of the  Colorado 
River,  Central Texas",  M.S.  Thesis,  Univ.  of Texas,  Geology Library • 

. WEEKS,  A.W.,  1945,  "Quaternary Deposits  of Texas  Coastal Plain between 

Brazos  River and Rio  Grande",  Am.  Assoc.  Petroleum Geologists  Bull., 
v •  2 9 ,  no .  12 ,  p •  16 93 -17 20 • 

This digitized document does not include the vita page from the original. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
